---
is1998: true
layout: page
linktitle: "S4"
pagetitle: "en_bigbook_step4_jc"
title: "How It Works Step 4"
subtitle: "Alcoholics Anonymous Big Book Study Step 4"
author:
- "by Bill W."
- "read by Joe McQ. and Charlie P."
- "transcribed by Andrew R."
---

### Taking inventory and responsibility (PLBB)

<i>**Charlie**: Let's go to the bottom of page 63. We've made our decision, We've made our prayer and the book says
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: Next we launched out on a course of vigorous action, the first step of which is a personal housecleaning, which many of us had never attempted. Though our decision 

<i>**Joe**: Step 3
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: was vital and crucial step, it could have little permanent effect unless at once followed by a strenuous effort to face, and to be rid of, the things in ourselves which had been blocking us. Our liquor was but a symptom. So we had to get down to causes and conditions.

<i>**Charlie**: Now, we always like to stop here for just a moment and look at the time element between Step 3 and Step 4. We always hear people asking the question. How long do you wait after you do Step 3 until you start on Step 4. And we hear all kind of answers. They'll say well 30 days, maybe 90 days, or maybe 6 months. We heard a professional in the field one time counseling people to wait a minimum or 2 years, and our question back to that person was, "How many people have you killed with that statement?" You see, we're trying to find a way to live where we not only can we be sober, but we can have a little piece of mind (`E707`), serenity (`E707`) and happiness (`E709`). And every day that we put off and procrastinate Step 4 is a day that we're still filled with resentments a day that we're still filled with shame (`D607`), fear (`D701`), guilt (`D607`), and remorse (`D607`). Another day that we don't feel good and we really don't know how many days we could go without our mind beginning to think about taking a drink. The next thing you know we've convinced ourselves that it's okay to drink end up drunk all over again. I don't know how many days I could go under those conditions, and frankly I'm not interested in finding out. Our book tells us when we should take Step 4. Step 3
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: <span class="text-muted">will have little permanent effect unless at once followed by this strenuous effort</span> 

<i>**Charlie**: which is Step 4. You know that does make sense, doesn't it as far back as far back as I can remember, 4 has always followed immediately after 3.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Now, knowing that, and knowing that we might get drunk if we don't get on with Step 4, then why would we still tend to procrastinate, and I think 2 reasons behind it, number one is fear. Some of our older members tend to play king of the mountain with this step. And we tell the newcomer just how tough it is. By God just wait until you get to Step 4. Bla bla bla. We just literally scare them to death. Let us say to day, that if we take Step 4 according to the Big Book of Alcoholics Anonymous there is nothing whatsoever to be afraid of. I think were all going to see that in just a little bit. Knowing that there's nothing to be afraid of, then there's still tend to procrastinate. I think probably one of the greatest reasons is simply confusion. For years, we could not see how to do Step 4 according to the Big Book. But the reason we couldn't do it is the instructions are there but they are so simple that our keen alcoholics with our keen intellectual alcoholic minds looking for something more complicated overlook the simplicity of Step 4. So in our desperation we read over in Step 5 something about sharing all your life story. We say, "Oh that's what they want us to do in Step 4. Is to write our life story so we could share it in Step 5" That's what I did in the beginning. Now my life story was not important to other people, but it must have been to me there was 92 pages in it. I took it to another poor suffering human being and I asked them to read it and they did. He said "Not very pretty, is it?" I said "No it isn't." He said "You'll never have to be that way again." He threw it in the wastepaper basket.
 
And I learned nothing from my life story to contribute to my alcoholism certainly nothing new because everything I wrote down, I already knew it so nothnig new came out of it. Today I realize that 95% of my life story really doesn't have anything to do with my alcoholism anyhow. The fact that I was born in 1929 I don't think it has a thing to do with my alcoholism. It might have something to do with someone elses alcoholism, but not mine. The fact that I graduated from high school at age 17 went immediately in the service, I don't think has anything to do with my alcoholism. The  fact that I was married at age 21 don't think it has anything to do with it. But I tell you what it did, the 95% that didn't very effectively covered up the 5% that did and I learned nothing from my life story to contribute to my alcoholism. So in our desperation again someone in miniapolis, MN wrote a 4th Step inventory guide. We took the Miniapolis guide and combined it with the Big Book and got more confused yet. Someone in Dallas, TX wrote a 4th Step inventory guide. We took the Dallas guide, combined it with the Miniapolis guide, combined it with the Big Book and got more confused yet. Today we saw one floating around today. We saw one that had 20 pages in it. I'll guarentee if you wasn't crazy as hell when you took it you would be when you were through with it, it was one of those all the time the instructions have been here we just never could see them before because we didn't understand how Bill writes and I think today if we can just kind of sit back and relax look at a few simple ideas we're going to see how easy this thing really is there's two things we got to remember: first he loved to use comparisons. talking about one thing that we already know to teach us something new. Also he did not like to repeat himself using the same words over and over. So he would tell us something then turn around and tell it again but use different words the second time. And bearing those two thoughts in mind I think we can see how simple this thing really is. He starts out by saying
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: Therefore, <span class="bg-direction">we started upon a personal inventory</span>. *This was Step Four*. 

<i>**Charlie**: Immediately he jumps into business. He says
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: A business which takes no regular inventory usually goes broke. 

<i>**Charlie**: I think his first comparison is this. If you had a business and I don't care what it is, selling ladies purses, mens' watches, bicycles or whatever. If you didn't inventory once in awhile and by the way inventory is defined as a written list of items. If you didn't go in there and make a list of the things that are in there, then you wouldn't know what's been stolen that you didn't get paid for. If you didn't inventory once in awhile you wouldn't know what's been sold and you need to reorder to put new stock in its place if you didn't inventory once in awhile you wouldn't know what's become damaged, it's sitting there taking up valuable floor space day after day after day. You're probably paying interest on borrowed money to put it there in the first place. If you didn't inventory once in awhile you wouldn't know what's become out of style. You need to put it on sale to get it out of the store to put something new in its place. If you had a business and you didn't inventory once in awhile you would go broke and I think we can all see that.

Okay in our personal lives we have a businesss too it's the greatest business in the world for us. It's the business of finding a way to live where we can have a little peace of mind serenity and happines so we don't have to go back to drinking, and if you don't inventory what's damaged and unsaleable in our heads that's going to cause us to go broke too, and going broke for us is going back to drinking. In either case, we would probably go broke without the inventory. Now then he's going to tell us how to take a business inventory. Now he could have used the word commmercial again, but he used business. Taking a commercial inventory Joe up here on the screen, and you have it in your handout material it's going to be called inventory comparison, I think it's Step 5 in your handout sheet. On one side it says business and one side says personal. We're going to take words out of the Big Book and put it under business. He said
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: Taking commercial inventory is a fact-finding 

<i>**Charlie**: And we're putting "fact-finding" under business.
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: and a fact-facing process. 

<i>**Charlie**: And we're putting "fact-facing" under business.
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: It is an effort to discover the truth 

<i>**Charlie**: And we're putting "truth" under business.
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: about the stock-in-trade. 

<i>**Charlie**: And we're putting "stock-in-trade" under business. The stock-in-trade is what's in there to sell. Ladies purses, the men's watches, the bicycles or whatever.
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: One object is to disclose damaged or unsalable goods, 

<i>**Charlie**: And we're putting "one object" under business. disclose damaged or unsalable goods...
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: to get rid of them promptly and without regret. 


<i>**Charlie**: And we're putting "promptly and without regret" under business. In other words we're going to go in there and we're going to try and find the facts and when we find them we're going to face the facts we're looking for the truth about the stock-in-trade. We're trying to find the damaged and unsaleable goods. The good items will not cause us to go broke. Oh they resell everyday, and we're making money off of them. The damaged and unsaleable goods they're the ones that's blocking the floor space and the shelf space and costing us money. When we finally find them we're going to try and get rid of them promptly and without regret. We can't put anything new in their place until they're gone. We're trying to find the stock-in-trade that's damaged and get it out of there.
</i>

If the owner of the business is to be successful, he cannot fool himself about values.

<i>**Charlie**: He's got to be honest. Once in awhile he'll try to fool himself. Well the reason these ladies' are buying these purses is that they just don't understand what's good for them. He made the decision to buy them, and he hates to admit that he made a mistake. He may keep them in there longer than he should, and it's going to keep costing him money, everyday. Does anyone in here have any problem with what he's told us about the business inventory? That we're going to try to find the facts. When we find them we're going to face them. We're looking for the truth about the stock-in-trade. We're looking for the damaged and unsalable goods, when we get rid of them, promptly and without regret. Always looking for the stock-in-trade that's damaged. Anybody got any problems there? He used a series of words to tell us how to take our personal inventory, which basically means the same thing. He said 
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: We did exactly the same thing with our lives. We took stock honestly. 

<i>**Charlie**: So we go to Step Four, and Step Four says now we're under personal on the right hand side of the sheet. Step Four said we've made a searching and we're putting searching right across from fact-finding. They mean the same thing. To find the facts, to search our the facts. We made a searching fearless and we're putting fearless straight across from fact-facing. They mean the same thing. To face the facts, to fearlessly look at them. We made a searching fearless moral, and there's where we got in trouble. We said, "Oh, Damn" there's that list of dirty filthy nasty items. And we don't want to look at them and we sure as hell don't want to show them to anybody else. Now I'm not sure what all Bill knew but I do know one thing. This guy understood the English language. And I really believe that if he wanted you and I to make a list of dirty filthy nasty items he would have said we made a searching and fearless amoral or immoral inventory. He didn't say that, he said moral. Bugged the hell out of us. Then eventually we went back to the dictionary. Do you know what the word "moral" is defined as? Truth. Things as they really are. The right and wrong of any given situation. The truth about things. So truth and moral mean exactly the same thing. We made a searching and fearless moral inventory of what? Of ourselves. We're the only stock-in-trade in this business of staying sober. Nobody else can make us sober. And nobody else can make us drink. Oh I'll agree they can make us thirsty as hell once in awhile, but they can't make us drink. We decide whether we drink or not. What part of us decides wether we drink or not. Is it our body, or is it our mind? The real problem of the alcoholic centers in the mind. So we're going to look inside ourselves in our minds, and we're going to find those flawed thinking processes, which is the damaged and unsaleable goods that block us off from God. Now we've made a decision to turn our will over to God and as long as our mind is filled with damaged and unsaleable goods, then God can't direct our thinking. We're going to have to find them, and once we find them, we're going to have to get rid of them promptly and without regret. And when those flawed thinking processes leave our minds, then our mind has openned up for God's thinking to enter. But it's only after they are gone that God can enter. Now there are 3 common manifestations of a life run on self-will. The flawed thinking processes in our mind that blocks God out are our resentments, fear, guilt and remorse associated with the harms done to other people. As long as our mind is occupied with those thoughts, then God's thoughts can't come in. Now I like to look at my head up here is a little bitty store, not much, a little bitty quick trip or 7-11 not a hell of a lot in it, never has been. Over here in my store I've got some display cases and they are filled with resentments. Damn him, damn her. By God I'll show them. Bla bla bla. Those display cases are already full. God simply cannot get in there because he is blocked out by the damaged and unsaleable goods called resentments. Over here in this part of my store, and it's filled with fear. Oh my God, what's she going to do when she finds out about this one? Oh my God, what's the banker going to do when that check hits the bank this time? He's already told me he's going to file on me next time. Oh my God, is that my car sitting out there in front end torn up. Oh my God, and on and on. God can't get in there. He's very effectively blocked out by those fears. Back here in the back of my store, I've got a little file room, and it's filled with guilt and remorse. God dwells in each of us. We know the difference between right and wrong. We do these things that hurt other people. We're scared to death what they're going to do when they find out and the guilt and remorse begins to eat us up. God can't get in that store room, he's already blocked out of there. An emergency phone call for whom? I hope everything is alright.

Now if I want God to direct my thinking, then I'm going to have to do something about the removal about this guilt and remorse, and if I can remove them, then God's thinking can enter into my mind and direct those portions of my mind where God was blocked out. The book is getting ready to show me just exactly how to look at these things truthfully. It's getting erady to show me how to remove them the greatest thing it's going to show me is how to keep them from coming back in the future. And if I do my part, then God can direct my thinking. But until I've done my part, God can't it's just that simple. He says
</i>


<p class="text-muted">
**Bill (read by Charlie)**: We did exactly the same thing with our lives. We took stock honestly. 
</p>

<i>**Charlie**: Truthfully. Morally.
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: First, we searched out the flaws in our make-up which caused our failure. Being convinced that self, manifested in various ways, was what had defeated us, we considered its common manifestations.

<!-- * END OF 4TH STEP PART 1 (S4_P1)
  -- BEGIN OF 4TH STEP PART 2 (S4_P2)
  -->
<hr/>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: <span class="bg-warning">Resentment is the "number one" offender.</span> <span class="bg-warning">It destroys more alcoholics than anything else. From it stem all forms of spiritual disease, for we have been not only mentally and physically ill, we have been spiritually sick.</span> <span class="bg-promise">When the spiritual malady is overcome, we straighten out mentally and physically.</span> <span class="bg-direction">In dealing with resentments, we set them on paper.</span>

<i>**Charlie**: So the first thing we're going to do is look at these resentments. Now I think we need to look at that word, and make sure we understand what it means. The word "resentment" is made up of two little words. First is the letters "re-." When you see "re-" in front of a word, it means to do again--replay, redo--it always means to do again. The last part of the word, "-sentment," comes from an old word "sentire," which means to feel. So the word "resentment" itself means to "re-feel". 

Okay. Let's say we're going through life, which we do on a daily basis. Remember always that everybody has got self-will--that's one of the problems with life. It's standard equipment; everybody's got self-will. From time to time, everybody tends to get sick in self. Maybe their social instinct is out of kelter. Maybe their security instinct is fouled up. And they do something to me that threatens one of my basic instincts of life. 

Maybe they put me down in the eyes of other people, and it threatens my self-esteem. Maybe they do something that threatens one of my personal relationships. Maybe they've ripped me off and stolen my money. Maybe they've done something to interfere with my sex life. Or maybe they do something that threatens one of my ambitions for the future. 

That's one of their wrongs--it's not a resentment yet. It doesn't become a resentment until I go over into the next room, or I go home that evening and I replay that thing in my mind, and I feel the pain the second time. The first time they did it to me, it hurt me. But when I when I go over here and replay it, and feel the pain a second time, then I've done it to myself. They did it the first time, but I'm going it the second time. 

And after a while, I'll replay it again, and I'll feel the pain the third time. And what I've found in my life is that I'm not always completely honest with myself. Because it seems as though when I replay this thing, each time I tend to change it just a little bit. And I tend to make what they did to me just a little bit worse. I tend to make what I did just a little bit less. I tend to make the pain just a little bit deeper. 

And if you let me play it over in my head enough times. After a while I would say to myself, "I was just standing there doing nothing. And they come along and did it to me." 

I love to watch football games. In a football game, you'll see a guy called the quarterback. Sometimes he'll throw a pass, and the guy whose supposed to recieve it--many times it's thrown up high on purpose so the other guys can't catch it. The guy who is going to receive it often has to jump high up in the air to catch it. 

Now the members of the opposing team have learned that if you can hit this guy while he's still up in the air before he gets real control of that ball, then you can knock it loose from him. So they wait until he jumps up in the air, and when that ball touches his fingers, they knock the hell out of him. He's completely defenceless. They'll hit him, and maybe he'll turn upside down. He'll fall on his head, his neck bends sideways, his legs spread apart, one arm bends completely behind his back--and it just hurts the hell out of him. 

Now the football game is like the game of life. It's going to go on. They're not going to stop it very long. One of two things happens for this guy. They'll run out there and check him over, and if he isn't hurt too bad, they'll pump a little air in him and get up and get him going again. If he's hurt too bad, then they'll drag him off to the side, they'll put somebody in his place, and the game starts again. The football game is going to continue--I don't care what's happened. 

Now the announcer up in the booth has got a resentment machine. After a while he'll say, "Let's look at that again." And this time it's in slow motion and living color. My God--it looks twice as bad as it did the first time. You can see how far his neck really did bend, how far his legs spread apart, and how far that arm was bent--and it looks twice as bad as it did the first time. 

After a while the announcer will say, "Let's look at that again." The game has been going on now for 15 minutes. The announcer is still bouncing this guy up and down, up and down off the ground. 

Now we alcoholics have up here, up in our heads, a resentment replay machine. We get up in the morning and we tune it up in living color. We clean the lens on it because we don't want to miss anything. We shine it on the world all day long. We record everything they do to us that's bad. We go home at night and play it over in our head and make ourselves sick--and blame it on them. 

Once in a while, we have a bad day. Once in a great while, they won't do anything to us.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: That's a bad day for an alcoholic.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: We've got our machine cleaned up, the lens is cleaned too, we're shining it on the world, and nobody will do anything to us. We don't have anything bad to record. 
</i>

<i>**Joe**: We don't record nothing good.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Do you know what we record those days. By God we record what they're thinking, that's what we do. We go home at night play it over in our head and make ourself sick. Now there's a bad thing about a resentment. Because each time you play it over in your head, each time you throw it out there, after while it turns around and comes back at you. And when it comes back at you, it comes back as self-resentment. And we begin to resent ourselves for being in a position to have those things happen to us. And after while self-resentments turns into self-pity. And that's the sickest, sickest that a human being can be is to be filled with self-pity. And we alcoholics love self-pity. We like to get up early in the morning, put self-pity on the cloak of dignity, and as we go out the door we say "Here I come mean old world, just do it to me, because I know you always do." It is a sick, sick way to build our self-esteem. The whole world is picking on us we must really be somebody. And my God we love that self-pity. If you want to make them mad, you feel sorry for one of those of us. We'll tell you in a hurry, "Don't you feel sorry for me, that's my damn job!" Is there any way that God can enter a mind filled with that kind of crap? No way. Thinking is controlled and dominated by these resentments and all of the things that go along with it. God is absolutely completely blocked out of our mind by these resentments. At the very least, we're going to have to do something about them. Now the intructions on how to do them are here, in the Big Book of Alcoholics Anonymous, but they're so simple, that we never could see them before. We've given you a sheet in your handout material called a review of resentments. I believe that's pages 9 and 10. What I would ask you to do now is take those last 2 columns, and fold them over to where you can't even see them. Where all you're looking at is collumn 1, 2, and 3. The example on page 65 has already been filled out, and we didn't know the procedure that Bill used to fill it out. So when we give them to you in the first 3 columns, is page 65 in the blank form. We're trying to emphasize that we're not trying to bring another inventory in A.A. we've already got enough of those. Page 65, the resentment sheet that you have, is 65 and the blank form. Column 1 "I'm Resentful At" Column 2 "The Cause" Column 3 "Affects My" Let's see if we can't find the instructions on how to fill it out in dealing with resentments we set them on paper. Okay, you've got the paper now. We're going to start setting them down.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: You know we're always taught to read from left to right. And if you read from left to right trying to figure out the inventory, you will start with the Mr. Brown, and then you write down your resentment, and then you change your mind and go to the second column and write down the cause, then you change your mind and you go to what part of the self was affected and you have to use those basic instincts of life and write down what part of self was affected. Then you'd go back to the first column mentally, and write down Mrs. Jones and then you change your mind again and go to the second column we get the idea if you do that long enough, if you have a mind like mine, it says "tilt." Too much information and I say, "What the hell all they wanted was my life story anyhow" So this I just disregard this. We didn't know how to fill out this column. It seems to us that you fill this out one column at a time from top to bottom. Leaving some space in between the names in column 1. So you fill that in column 2 a little bit later. Because in our book it says 
</i>


**Bill (read by Joe)**: <span class="bg-direction">We listed people, institutions or principle with who we were angry.</span> 

<i>**Joe**: Period. From top to bottom in column 1 we simply write down all of the
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: <span class="text-muted">people, institutions or principle with who we were angry.</span> 

<i>**Joe**: From top to bottom, leaving a little space between each one of them, all the way down.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: People, that's self explanatory. Institutions are those things such as the police department, the internal revenue service. The federal government, the church, etc. Principals are those old, old guiding--I hate to use the word laws but it's the only thing I can think of--natural laws that's interfered with our style of living. The 10 commandments, that's a set of principles. And when I was out there drinking I don't want to hear nothing about the 10 commandments. I'm breaking all them but one, and maybe I broke it in a blackout too, I don't know. Another principle I've always hated says "What goes up must come down" I never cared for that one. Another one says "What you give out is what you get back." Another one said "There are no free rides," you'll pay for whatever you get. My dad used to say, "When you lay down with dogs you'll get fleas on you every time." Those old, old principles that interfered with our style of living. Now you don't need o be sober very long to do this. All we got to do is take these things out of our head, and put them down on paper. You don't have to have a high education to do this. If you can't write, then you feed the names to somebody else and let them write them down. And while our mind is on one thing only, let's fill out the first column from top to bottom. I've never seen an alcoholic yet that did not know just who and what--by God--we're mad at. We spent thousands of hours in bars talking about it. All we gotta do is take it out of our head, and put it down on a piece of paper, and we will have completed the first instruction. Hopefully the same thing will happen to you that happened to me when you do this. They came to me and said, "List your resentments." I said, "I don't have any." And they said "Surely you got one or two." Maybe you don't understand what the resentment is and they explained to me that it was to re-feel old pains and old hurts. And I said "Yeah, I got a couple of those". They said "Put them on paper. Leave a little space in between each one." So I got a sheet of paper, and leaving a space between, like the book does. First thing I knew was I had about 8 names on that sheet of paper. So I reached over and got another sheet of paper, and after awhile I had 8 more listed, and I got another sheet of paper, and the next thing I knew I had 8 more listed, and so I got another sheet of paper. I got up to about 152, and I said you're madder at hell at everything. I did not know that. You can only see one resentment at a time in your head. I don't think any of us will ever see how many resentments we really do have, and how much they controlled and dominate our thinking, until we put them on a sheet of paper, and see them in their entirety for the first time. Now we've made the decision to let God direct our thinking. And if we've got that many resentments, and resentments direct our thinking then God can't, and it's just that simple. Just by the listing of the names, we learn something very valuable about ourselves. How resentful we really are. You just can't see this stuff on your head, it's got to go on paper, so we filled out the first column. Bill said "Mr. Brown, Mrs. Jones, my employer, and my wife" He probably had more than that, I think he just didn't want to use any more space in the Big Book. Mine was that long, long list of about 152 names. Joe?
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: <span class="bg-direction">We asked ourselves why we were angry.</span> 

<i>**Joe**: Period. Stop right there, and go the second column, "The Cause." In the illustration he used here very short and sweet. Just 4 or 5 little words, not too many words to describe the cause. Simplicity is the key here in the second column. He's resentful at Mr. Brown, Why? "His attentions to my wife. / He told my wife of my mistress. Brown may get my job at the office." I don't know Mr. Brown, but I'm already mad at him myself. Now he's resentful at Mrs. Jones because "She's a nut / She snubbed me / She committed her husband for drinking, he's my friend / She's a gossip" What she did was put his old drinking buddy in the nut house, and he don't like that at all. He's mad at his employer, Why? Well, "He's unreasonable, unjust, overbearing."
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: He probably said "Say Bill, by the way, where were you all the day yesterday, anyhow?"
</i>

<i>**Joe**: "He threatends to fire me for drinking and padding my expense account."
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: That unreasonable as hell isn't it.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: Very narrow-minded. He's really mad at his wife. "She misunderstands and nags, and she likes old Brown, and she wants the house put in her name." Tie that together put the house in her name it's about time to get a little upset isn't it?  So simply in the second column we just write down why we were angry beside each name one at a time using 4 or 5 little words to describe the cause. There may be one cause or 2 or 3 causes. But we simply write them down in the seccond column
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: We're not going to write any big long essays, just a few simple words by each name. There may be one cause or there may be multiple causes as we have here. Whatever it is we put it down. I filled out the second column, and I begin to realize something that has become very valuable to me. I begin to realize it's not the people and the institutions that I'm upset with. It's what they've done to me that's got me upset. I can take Mr. Brown out of here, and put Mr. Green in. I'll be just as upset with Green as I am with Brown if he does the same thing to me. I can take Mrs. Jones out of here, and put Mrs. Smith in. If Smith does the same thing I'm going to be just as upset with her as I am with Jones. I can put my wife our of here and put my mistress in. If she does the same thing I'll be just as upset with her. I begin to realize it's not  them that's got me upset, it's what they've done to me that's got me upset. The reason that's valueable is because of this. I'm getting ready to start out on a lifetime changing process to develop the best possible relationship that I can with the world and everybody in it. So I can have maximum peace of mind and serenity. A part of that relationship is a little later on in my program, am I going to have to go around to a bunch of people and ask them to forgive me for what I've done to them. By the same token I'm going to have to forgive others for what they've done to me. And part of that forgiving process can start right here. When I begin to realize that it's not them, it's what they've done that got me upset. That starts getting names out of the way. It's going to make it a lot easier to handle this in the future. So I filled out two columns now. Number one, I learned how resentful I reall am, and how much that blocks me from God. Number two I learned that it's not them I resent, it's what they've done to me that I resent. 2 valuable things, now let's look at the third column.
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: In most cases it was found that our self-esteem, our pocketbooks, our ambitions, our personal relationships, (including sex) were hurt or threatened. So we were sore. We were "burned up."

### Dealing with resentment (PLBB)

**Bill (read by Joe)**: On our grudge list we set opposite each name our injuries. Was it our self-esteem, our security, our ambitions, our personal, or sex relations, which had been interfered with?

We were usually as definite as this example:

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Resentful At</th>
<th>The Cause</th>
<th>Affects My</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Mr. Brown</td>
<td>His attention to my wife.</td>
<td>Sex relations, Self-esteem (fear)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Told my wife of my mistress.</td>
<td>Sex relations, Self-esteem (fear)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Brown may get my job at the office.</td>
<td>Security, Self-esteem (fear)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mrs. Jones</td>
<td>She's a nut--she snubbed me. She committed her husband for drinking. He's my friend. She's a gossip.</td>
<td>Personal relationship, Self-esteem (fear)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>My employer</td>
<td>Unreasonable--Unjust--Overbearing--Threatens to fire me for drinking and padding my expense account.</td>
<td>Security, Self-esteem (fear)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>My wife</td>
<td>Misunderstands and nags. Likes Brown. Wants house put in her name.</td>
<td>Pride, Personal, Sex relations, Security (fear)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


<i>**Joe**: And again using that information that we got from the basic instricts of life, we simply fill out the third column, what part of self was affected by that, what basic instinct was threatened by the actions that those people did?
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: I can't be upset with you unless you've done something to threaten one of these basic instincts of life. If you threaten my social instinct in any way--my self-esteem, my personal relations, etc.--you're going to upset me and make me angry. If you threaten my security, either  material or emotional, you're going to upset me and make me angry. If you threaten my sex life in any way, you're going to upset me and make me angry. 

And as I begin to fill out the third column and put down the part of self that is affected, in most cases I begin to see a pattern develop. Maybe beside each column I'll put "self-esteem", and maybe I begin to see my main problem is self-esteem. Maybe I'm putting down "security,"  and maybe I'm see where my main problem deals with security. Maybe I'm putting something under "sex" each time, and I begin to realize that the sex thing is my main problem. 

I begin to see which part of self really does stand out. It's probably going to be a combination of all three. But I can certainly see which part of self really does predominate and stand out when I keep seeing it appear over and over and over again. 

When I filled out the third column, here's where I've learned something that I think is the most valuable thing I ever learned about me. When I filled out the third column for the first time in my life, I could see where anger comes from. I've always had a problem with anger. I've always acted and reacted with anger, I did things that hurt other people. I would be ashamed of it. I said "I'll never do that again." Then I'd turn right around, and get angry, and do it all over again. 

You can't do anything about a problem until you understand the problem. I never did understand where anger came from. I always thought it was just one of those feelings that flitted into your mind--you could do nothing about it. Today, I realize that anger comes from a threat to one of these basic instincts of life. 

Now, if my basic instincts are under control at the level that God intended--if my relationship with God is okay--then you can do anything you want to with me, and I'm not going to experience anger over it. I guarentee you, if my instincts are out of control, then my relationship with God is not right. Just about anything that you do to me that threatens a basic instinct creates anger. And I romp and stomp  and raise hell with you and everybody around you. 

You know, this lady that I'm married to today--hopefully I can introduce you to her tomorrow--she's here with us this weekend. A beautiful lady named Barbara. If there's any such thing as a black-belt Al-Anon, she's one of them. She's got now about 31 or 32 years in the Al-Anon fellowship. Great, great program. 

But Barbara is like all human beings--she has self-will too. Now, once in a great while she'll get sick in self. Al-Anons do that too once in awhile--not too often, but once in a while. She'll do something that threatens one of my basic instincts of life. And when she does it, it hurts.

Now, I've found if my relationship with God is right, and my instincts are at the level God intended, I'm able to say, "Well, the poor old thing. They're sick just like we are. They can't help it any more than we can." And that thing will just slide off of my back, and it won't bother me at all. I just go on about my business. 

Thirty days later, though, the same lady does the same thing--only this time my instincts are not under control, and my relationship with God is not right today--and I react to what she did with anger.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: And I romp and I stomp and I raise hell with Barbara and everybody around me all day long. The same lady did the same thing, but I choose to react to it in an entirely different manner based upon my relationship with God and where my instincts are that day. Thank God I've learned that. Because you see I can't do anything about Barbara. I can't do anything about any other human being on Earth, but I can do something about my relationship with God, and keeping my instincts under control where I don't have to get angry. And if I don't have to get angry, then I am in much less chance of drinking than if I continue that anger over and over and over. Thank God I learned that, one of the best pieces of information I ever found. Now we have filled out 3 columns. Column 1 we listed the people who we were angry with, "Resentful At." And we realized how resentful we really are, and how much that blocks us off from the sunlight of the spirit. Column 2 we've learned that it's not them we are resentful at, it's what they've done to us. Column 3, it's not even what they've done to us, it's how we choose to react to it based on our relationship with God, and whether our instincts are under control or not. We're going to fill out a couple of names here from our inventories, we're not going to do the whole thing, but just 2 or 3 names as an example. The first name on my sheet, was this lady named Barbara. 
</i>

<!-- * END OF 4TH STEP PART 2 (S4_P2)
  -- BEGIN OF 4TH STEP PART 3 (S4_P3)
  -->
<hr/>

<i>**Charlie**: Thirty some odd years ago, I hated this lady with a purple passion. If I could have done away with her and not get caught I believe I would have done it. I used to lay awake at night fantisizing about this thing. Tomorrow morning when she's on the way to work, and the way she always worked I believed in her being self-supporting through her own contributions. Always thinking of others. Tomorrow morning when she's on the way to work she's going to get run over by a big semi truck. And it's not going to be just any trucking company, it's going to be a very affluent trucking company, and they're going to run over her and kill her, and then I'm going to sue them, and I'm going to come out of this deal getting rid of her, with 2 or 3 million dollars in hand. You Al-Anons are not the only ones that fantasize, we alkies did it too, believe me we did. Second name on my sheet was the I.R.S. God I hated those people with a purple passion. Just mention their name I begin to froth at the mouth immediately. Joe what was the first name on your inventory sheet?
</i>

<i>**Joe**: Rose
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Rose. Wife number one, Rose. Now it's just that simple that's how you fill out the first column. We go to the second column. Why am I so upset with Barbara. Last year, before she went down to Al-Anon, She had the audacity to file for divorce, three times. She spending more money on divorces, than I'm spending on booze and everything that goes with it. And By God I hated her for that. Why am I so upset with the I.R.S. well, they're trying to put me in jail, that's why. Joe? How come you're so upset with Rose?
</i>

<i>**Joe**: She had an affair with another man, after all I've done for her.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: She had an affair with another man. Really upset with her. Now we go to the third column. Barbara filing for divorce three times is that a threat to my self-esteem, oh you betcha. What are people going to think of me now taking this lady back after she's filed for divorce three times. Barbara filing for divorce for three times, is that a threat to my personal relationships. Sure it is. She's going to take the kids and she's going to leave, or they're going to kick me out, one of the two. No personal relationships. Her filing for divorce three times is that a threat to my security oh yeah, by the time she's through she's going to have it all, don't worry about that. Is it a threat to my sex life. Oh yeah, she probably won't let me have any sex if we get a divorce. I.R.S. trying to put me in jail is that a threat to me self-esteem? What are people going to think about me after this deal is over with. Is it a threat to my personal relationships? They're not going to let me have any relationship with my wife and children if I'm in jail. Is it a threat to my security, oh yeah, they're going to take every penny I've got by the time it's over with. Is it a threat to my sex life? The kind I'd like to have you betcha it's a threat to it there may be some in there I don't want. Old Rose having an affair with another man is that a threat to Joe's self-esteem? Is it a threat to his personal relationships? Is it a threat to his security? Yeah, he'll have to go to work now she's been supporting him for the last 10 years. A threat to his sex life, oh yeah. All these things are threats to those things. Okay, when we have finished filling out these three columns and we've been able to see column 1, how many resentments we had, column two the cause of the resentment, column three the part of self that was affected, and we've learned valuable information about ourselves. Just by filling out those 3 columns, now let's see what we do with those 3 columns, after we've filled them out. Joe?
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: <span class="bg-direction">We went back through our lives. Nothing counted but thoroughness and honesty. When we were finished we considered it carefully.</span> <span class="bg-warning">The first thing apparent was that this world and its people were often quite wrong. To conclude that others were wrong was as far as most of us ever got.</span> 

<i>**Joe**: I always knew that.</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: <span class="bg-warning">The usual outcome was that people continued to wrong us and we stayed sore. Sometimes it was remorse and then we were sore at ourselves. But the more we fought and tried to have our own way, the worse matters got. As in war, the victor only SEEMED to win. Our moments of triumph were short-lived.</span>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: It is plain that a life which includes deep resentment leads only to futility and unhappiness. To the precise extent that we permit these, do we squander the hours that might have been worth while. 

<i>**Charlie**: When I read that last statement, and I stopped and I tried to look back in my life and see. How much time I've squandered in resentments. I don't know about you, but I know about me, when I've got a good resentment up there churning around in my head I'm pretty well paralyzed from doing anything worthwhile. And one of my favorite things that I was doing back when I was drinking was to get up early in the morning, have a drink of whiskey and a cup of coffee. And turn on my resentment replay machine, and replay what she did to me yesterday, and replay what the guy did to me a month ago, and replay what that person said to me six months ago, and replay what that damn boss did to me about a year ago, and replay what that damn policeman did to me five years ago, and replay what my uncle did to me ten years ago, and replay what my mother did to me 15 years ago, and replay what my father did to me 20 years ago, and it took me just about an hour to run through that tape and I loved every moment of it. When that tape would run out I'd have another drink of whiskey and another cup of coffee, and I would turn on my get even machine. Now by God the next time she does that, I'll do this and she'll do that ??? I'll put it on her they're not going to treat me that way and it took me just about an hour to run through that tape and I loved every moment of it. When I came into A.A. I found out that the only difference was I wasn't taking the drink of whiskey I was having a cup of coffee, turning on my resentment replay machine run it for an hour another cup of coffee, turning on the get even machine, run it for an hour. I have spent literally thousands and thousands of hours of resentments. And as far as I can tell, they've never done me any good whatsoever. They certainly never made me any money. They never made me feel better. They only made me feel worse. They never straightened out a relationship with another  human being, they only made it worse and worse and worse. And as far as I can tell that was absolute complete waste of time. Now as a human being I really believe  today that I'm allotted just so much time to be here on Earth. And I'm being to approach the end of mine. And for the first time in my life, not only am I sober, but I am peaceful happy and free. For the first time in my life, I'm sober, and I feel great. I didn't know that you could be sober and feel as good as I feel today. What little time that I have left I want to enjoy every moment of it. I don't want to waste any more time in resentments or anything else because that blocks me off from God, I want to enjoy every moment of every day that I have left. I simply do not intend to waste any more time in resentments. They block you off from God. They block you off from your fellow man. They just make you sicker and sicker and sicker. What time we spend on them is an absolute waste of time. That's one of the worst things about a resentment, wasting time we have left on resentments. But that's not the worst thing, here's the worst thing about a resentment said
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: But with the alcoholic, whose hope is the maintenance and growth of a spiritual experience, this business of resentment is infinitely grave. We found that it is fatal. For when harboring such feeling we shut ourselves off from the sunlight of the Spirit. The insanity of alcohol returns and we drink again. And with us, to drink is to die.

<i>**Charlie**: That's the worst thing about a resentment. When we've got a good resentment churning around in our head we don't feel good we're blocked off from God, and after a while the mind, wanting to feel better begins to think about the sense of ease and comfort that comes at once by taking a couple of drinks, next thing we know we become insane we convince ourselves that it's okay to drink. We take a drink, and we trigger the allergy and we end up drunk all over again. That's the worst part about a resentment. The book says
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: If we were to live, we had to be free of anger. The grouch and the brainstorm were not for us. They may be the dubious luxury of normal men, but for alcoholics these things are poison.

<span class="bg-direction">We turned back to the list,</span>

<i>**Charlie**: You see this is why you've got to have a written inventory. If you had it in your head, you would have lost it already.
</i>


**Bill (read by Charlie)**: <span class="text-muted">We turned back to the list,</span> <span class="bg-direction">for it held the key to the future. We were prepared to look for it from an entirely different angle. 

<i>**Charlie**: Always before when I looked at it to see what those suckers had done to me. Today I would look at it to see what that resentment is doing to me. And if it's blocking me off from God, maybe causing me to get drunk. Then I'm looking at it from an entirely different angle.
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: We began to see that the world and its people really dominated us.</span> <span class="bg-warning">In that state, the wrong-doing of others, fancied or real, had power to actually kill.</span> 

<i>**Charlie**: And I stopped and I said, "Charlie, how dumb can you be?" All my life I've been proud that I stand on my own two feet. Nobody tells me what to do. I don't need your advice. Thank you. And I suddently realized that other people, through my resentment toward them, have controlled and dominated my thinking, as far back as I could remember. And if they've controlled and dominated my thinking they've controlled and dominated my actions, they've absolutely and completely controlled and dominated my entire life for me. I always thought I was in charge. But I suddently realized other people have been in charge as far back as I can remember through my resentments toward them. And then I said, "You really are stupid, aren't you?" Because some of these people have been dead and buried in the grave yard for years. And they've been reaching out from the grave. And they've had me by the yang-yang as far back as I can remember. And when I saw that I said, "To hell with them. I'm not going to let those people, alive or dead, live in my head, rent free, any longer." I made a decision to let God direct my thinking. And if others direct it alive or dead, justified or unjustified, then God can't, and it's just that simple. An amazing thing happened to me right here. We alcoholics fancy ourselves as reasonably intelligent people. I don't know that we're smarter than anybody else, but we're reasonably intelligent people, and we don't like to look stupid. And when I saw the stupidity of letting those people control me and dominate me, it looked so dumb that about 95% of these resentments began to disappear automatically. When I saw how stupid that really was. But I found I had 4, 5, 6 that were so deeply embedded in my mind for so long, that they didn't automatically disappear when I saw the stupidity behind them. For those I had to have some additional help. We now come to the first prayer in Step Four. We've heard about the Step 3, the Step 7 prayers, we never heard about the Step Four Prayer. Let's see how we can use prayer to remove those deep, deep seated resentments.
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: How could we escape? We saw that these resentments must be mastered, but how? We could not wish them away any more than alcohol.

<i>**Joe**: You can't heal a sick mind with a sick mind. You can't wish your way out of it.
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: This was our course: <span class="bg-direction">We realized that the people who wronged us were perhaps spiritually sick.</span> <span class="bg-warning">Though we did not like their symptoms and the way these disturbed us, they, like ourselves, were sick too.</span> 

<i>**Joe**: This is part of the prayer.
</i>

<span class="bg-prayer">We asked God to help us show them the same tolerance, pity, and patience that we would cheerfully grant a sick friend.</span> <span class="bg-direction">When a person offended we said to ourselves, "This is a sick man. How can I be helpful to him? God save me from being angry. Thy will be done."</span>

<!-- * END OF 4TH STEP PART 2 (S4_P3)
  -- BEGIN OF 4TH STEP PART 3 (S4_P4)
  -->
<hr/>

<i>**Joe**: And I'm like Charlie, I've spent many, many years of my life thinking my mind was racing uncontrollably. Trying to figure out some way of getting even with those people, and I finally figured out how to get even with them. Well the way you get even with people is you pray for them. And when you pray for them, then you're even, and I didn't know that. And after I was sober about 3 or 4 months, I went to a little conference in Apache, OK. There was alady there named Alabam Cathy some of yall knew Alabam she had a big influence on my life and she said a couple of things that night that really struck me. She said she had a soul-sickness. and I could identify with that. My last night of drinking I was sitting on a barstool and I had a real sick feeling in my stomach and it wasn't throwing up time sick it was sick feeling, she said she had a soul-sickness, that's what I had, a soul-sickness. She said another thing that night, she said "I have peace of mind today" And boy that really struck me, because that's all I ever wanted . I loved Alabam, she was always excitied about life and what was going to happen next  and after the meeting was over with we were sitting around in the lobby of this hotel and it was about 3:00 am, and I was sitting there watching Alabam operate and she wasn't saying anything, it was just Alabam and myself and a little sponsor George, little black guy laying in her lap and begin to talk to Alabam. I said "How do you get peace of mind, I want peace of mind." She said Joe tell me what's going on in your mind, I told her I was going to meetings and going to meetings. But at night I would go home, and lay down in my mind and I would begin to think about all those situations that we talked about. She said "Joe, you're just full of resentments." And I said "What is a resentment?" She said a resentment was old angers and old hurts that are re-felt over and over again, and all that anger they you intended to use up on them, you're turning it on yourself. Making yourself sick, and blaming it on them. She explained that to me and it took a while for me to understand finally I did, and I said "Is there any solutions for these?" And she said "Yes there is, just happens to be" and she referred to page 67 and showed me this information here, and she said some of those deep-seated resentments that you have you'll need some additional help. She said of page 551 of this book is a story of a lady who had those deep-seated resentments. If you turn to that page in the book she said we'll read and see what it had to say. Well Alabam had a purse about this big, and she began to look in that purse. You know how they are, digging around. And she finally found one of these books. She pulled it out of there, and said, "Let's look at page 551 and see what it says." So I turned to page 551 in her book, and on the third paragraph.
</i>

[^wynn]: **Andrew**: Excerpt from "Freedom from Bondage" by Wynn L.

<blockquote>
**Wynn (read by Joe)**: Ive[^wynn] had many spiritual experiences since Ive been in the program, many that I didnt recognize right away, for Im slow to learn and they take many guises. But one was so outstanding that I like to pass it on whenever I can in the hope that it will help someone else as it has me. As I said earlier, self-pity and resentment were my constant companions and my inventory began to look like a thirty-three year diary, for I seemed to have a resentment against everybody I had ever known. All but one responded to the treatment suggested in the Steps immediately, but this one posed a problem.

<i>**Charlie**: All but one automatically began to disappear when she saw how dumb they really were.
</i>

**Wynn (read by Joe)**: It was against my mother and it was twenty-five years old. I had fed it, fanned it and nurtured it as one might a delicate child, and it had become as much a part of me as my breathing. It had provided me with excuses for my lack of education, my marital failures, personal failures, inadequacy, and of course, my alcoholism and, though I really thought I had been willing to part with it, now I knew I was reluctant to let it go.

**Wynn (read by Joe)**: One morning, however, I realized I had to get rid of it, for my reprieve was running out, and if I didnt get rid of it I was going to get drunkand I didnt want to get drunk any more. In my prayers that morning I asked God to point out to me some way to be free of this resentment. During the day a friend of mine brought me some magazines to take to a hospital group I was interested in, and I looked through them and a banner across the front of one featured an article by a prominent clergyman in which I caught the word resentment.

**Wynn (read by Joe)**: He said, in effect: If you have a resentment you want to be free of, if you will pray for the person or the thing that you resent, you will be free. If you will ask in prayer for everything you want for yourself to be given to them, you will be free. Ask for their health, their prosperity, their happiness, and you will be free. Even when you dont really want it for them, and your prayers are only words and you dont mean it, go ahead and do it anyway. Do it every day for two weeks and you will find you have come to mean it and to want it for them, and you will realize that where you used to feel bitterness and resentment and hatred, you now feel compassionate understanding and love.
</i>
<br/>-- (A.A., p. 551, "Freedom from Bondage.")
</blockquote>

<i>**Joe**: Well I went home after that meeting and got in my bed that Sunday night lay down any my old mind fipped over again and started racing uncontrollably, so I said I think I'll pray for those people. I started praying for those people that night and my list got longer
the next day I prayed for those people again
that afternoon I prayed for those people
that night I prayed for those people
and I don't know how long it was 2 or 3 weeks or more I don't know, but it seemed like I was in constant prayer for day and night praying for those people
I don't know exactly what happened but I do know that one morning it was one of those beautiful spring mornings we have in Oklahoma. I got stuck at this stoplight just the length of a stoplight--that's what happened--I looked over at that beautiful house sitting over there, and the grass was so green it was just beautiful, the greenest green I've ever seen, the tulips were in full bloom red and yellow. The little squirrels were in the trees the birds were in the trees whistling, and it was just a beautiful morning. I thought to myself, by God, how long has it been since I've seen that you know I could not remember. I could not remember. When this book talks about being cut off from the sunlight of the spirit I really do know what that means I really do. Because that morning it was so vivid.

Now what happened was that those people did not change but my thoughts and feelings toward them did change. You see, and has never returned again. Thank God for this program called Alcoholics Anonymous. Now I've been there, and I don't want to ever return again.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: I think the reason this works so well is that prayer for another human being--prayer for their welfare and their happiness--it's probably one of the greatest expressions of love that one human being can have for another. Love and hate can't exist on the same plane. As we pray for that human being, asking that God give them in their life the same thing we want in ours--peace of mind, serenity, happiness, etc.--over a period of time that resentment will begin to disappear. 

Sometimes it just takes two or three prayers. Sometimes it takes every day for two weeks. Sometimes it might take every day for two months. But if we will consistently do it, we will find sooner or later that that resentment is replaced with love and the resentment disappears. 

Now, if you've got a resentment that you don't want to get rid of, for God's sake don't pray about them. Because if you do, then you're going to lose it. I know--I speak from experience. I had a guy that I really, really resented. And again, I think I would gladly have put him away if I could have gotten away with it without getting caught.

When I got to this part of the inventory, I went to my sponsor. Now this is going to be one of those "take it to the grave" resentments. I had no desire to remove it at all. And I'd worked on all of the others, but this one just stuck in there. 

I went to my sponsor, and I told him about it. He said, "Charlie, you've got to get rid of that resentment." I said, "I don't want to get rid of this resentment." He said, "Well that's besides the point. If you don't get rid of it, sooner or later it's going to get you drunk." And in my smart mouth I said, "Well, how the hell do I do it?" And he said, "Let me show you." And he took me to this prayer too. He said, "Now read that and go home, and do what it says, and you'll get rid of that resentment."

I went home and got on my knees--which again I very seldom did in those days--and I said, "God, I want you to give that S.O.B. everything he deserves." And that's the only prayer I had for him that day. 

I prayed again and again and again. Three or four or five days later--I don't know when--I found myself saying something that I didn't really mean to say. I found myself saying, "God, give him in his life what I want in mine--the same peace of mind, serenity, and happiness that I seek for myself."

Four or five or six or seven days later--I don't know when--I woke up one morning and that resentment was gone. Completely gone. And it's never returned since that date. 

I think the irony in the whole situation is that it wasn't 30 days later, this guy moved in as my next-door neighbor. This thing really does work.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: You see, what I learned from this experience is love is forgiving and love is for giving.[^dyer] You see?
</i>

[^dyer]: **Andrew**: Quote attributed to Wayne W. Dyer.

<i>**Charlie**: Now, just think, this old head up here that these display cases over here were filled with resentments has now been emptied out. The resentments--the damaged and unsaleable goods--called resentment has now been removed from my mind. Now when that happens to me there's another natural law that applies that says nature abhors a vacuum. There's no such thing as a vacuum or void there's always something trying to rush in and fill it up. If those resentments disappear, God's not going to leave another hole in my head, I got enough of those already. They will have to be replaced with something else, and the only thing that can replace them will be the opposite of them. Where my mind used to be filled with resentments that portion of it is now filled with love, patience, tolerance, compassion, and goodwill toward my fellow man. That's God's thinking my thinking was the resentment God's thinking is love, patience, tolerance, compassion and goodwill. And that part of my mind is now filled with God's thinking. You see, there's nothing negative here at all. This is a positive happening. In part of my mind, I've now got peace of mind, serenity and happiness. Much less chance of drinking now than when I started the inventory process. What really blew my mind is this I didn't have to go to any other fellowships and I didn't have to read any other books to find love, patience, tolerance, compassion and goodwill. If God dwells within me, and my book says he does, and that's always been a part of my makeup. I just never could use it before in my chase for money power, prestige, sex, and what I thought were the good things of life. Those thoughts had to be repressed to let me operate on the level I wanted to operate on. But now that resentments are gone they automatically come to the surface. I've never seen anything like this before I don't really understand how this works I simply know that if do the simple things the book tells me to do this happens automatically and resentments are replaced with love, patience, tolerance, compassion and goodwill toward my fellow man. But it would do me no good to get rid of resentments if I didn't know how to keep them from coming back. Because the world is full of sick people. They're going to do it to me again tomorrow. If I'm not careful I'll resent, and it seemed as though I don't get just one. When I get one let me play with it just a little bit and then I've got two. Let me play with those two, and then I've got 10. The next thing you know I'm a basket case and I'm sick all over again. I've got to do one more thing let's unfold those last two columns on your inventory sheet. Let's go to page 67 and we'll see if we can't find the information to fill out the last two columns.
</i>

<!-- * END OF 4TH STEP PART 4 (S4_P4 "Freedom from Bondage")
  -- BEGIN OF 4TH STEP PART 5 (S4_P5 "Part 4")
  -->
<hr/>

<i>**Charlie**: In the second paragraph on page 67, it says
</i>

<p class="text-muted">We avoid retaliation or argument. We wouldn't treat sick people that way. If we do, we destroy our chance of being helpful. We cannot be helpful to all people, but at least God will show us how to take a kindly and tolerant view of each and every one.</p>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: Referring to our list again. 

<i>**Charlie**: So you gotta have a written inventory. This is the second time we've had to go back to it. 
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: <span class="text-muted">Referring to our list again.</span>

Putting out of our minds the wrongs others had done, we resolutely looked for our own mistakes. 


<i>**Charlie**: Uh, oh. We've never done this, have we? We've always looked to see what they did. We've never looked to see what we did.
</i>

Where had we been selfish (`A2`), dishonest (`A1`), self-seeking (`A2`) and frightened (`A3`)? Though a situation had not been entirely our fault, we tried to disregard the other person involved entirely. Where were we to blame? The inventory was ours, not the other man's. When we saw our faults we listed them. We placed them before us in black and white. We admitted our wrongs honestly and were willing to set these matters straight.

<i>**Charlie**: So we go to the fourth column. And if you'll noticed the heading on the fourth column, it says, "What did I do?"
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: <p class="text-muted">Putting out of our minds the wrongs others had done, we resolutely looked for our own mistakes.</p>

<i>**Charlie**: What if anything did I do to set in motion trains of circumstances which in turn caused people or institutions to hurt me and eventually led to my resentment of them for doing so? So I went to column 4. And I looked at this lady named Barbara. And I said, "Now, Charlie, you forget what she did. You forget her filing for three divorces. What if anything did you do to set that in motion?" And it took me just about 5 seconds to realize that if I hadn't been out there screwing around she probably wouldn't have caught me. And she probably wouldn't have filed for divorce in the first place. Took me another 2 or 3 seconds to say to myself, "Well, if I hadn't been sneaking around behind her back lying to her all the time--completely dishonest with her--she probably wouldn't have filed for divorce in the first place." Another 3 or 4 seconds and I was able to say for myself, "Well, If I wasn't blowing all of our money on booze and what I think was important, she probably wouldn't have filed for divorce in the first place." And I began to realize why I love that resentment. Because when I could concentrate on her filing for divorce, and play that over and over and over in my head. Gradually distorting the picture every time I played it over. Making what she did a little bit worse, and what I did a little bit less. And let me play it long enough I could gradually transfer all blame to her and make myself as pure as the driven snow. And it was all her damn fault in the first place. I thought, "My God, Charlie, have you done that with any other resentments here?" I looked at the I.R.S. I said, "Forget what they're doing to you trying to put you in jail. What did you do if anything to set in motion the fact that they're trying to put you in jail?" Well it didn't take 2 seconds to say, "Well if I hadn't been cheating on my income tax, they wouldn't have been trying to put me in jail anyhow." And rather than look at what I had done to them, I had played it over and over and over. Distorted the picture and transferred all blame to them, made myself as pure as the driven snow. That way I could continue through life doing what I wanted to do and never have to look at me, because after all it's all their fault in the first place. Joe's resentment against Rose, what did you do if anything to set that in motion?
</i>

<i>**Joe**: Charlie was out there screwing around, but I was committing adultery
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Okay. Sneaking around behind their back and lying to her all the time, and Rose finally got enough ot it. She said, "I'll show him." And she went out and had her own affair. And Joe over a period of time, played that resentment over and over. Gradually transfered all blame to her, made himself as pure as the driven snow. I went down through my list of resentments. I never found a name on there that I hadn't done something to them to set this thing in motion and I had resented it and played it over and over and distorted the picture transferred all blame to them made myself as pure as the driven snow. If you're a practicing alcoholic you've got to develop these kind of skills. You know we have a conscience we're not drunken bumb so we know the difference between right and wrong. And I don't think we could live with ourselves if we had to honestly see what was going on whenever we're out there doing our thing but you see we never have to see it because we've got this convinient thing called resentments that we play them over and over distort the picture and transfer all blame to others and we men go from woman to woman to woman. And you ladies go from man to man to man. And we go from job to job to job. And we go from city to city to city. And we go from country to country to country. And it's always their damn fault. That's the only way we would live the kind of life we were living--by being able to transfer blame to others and none of us realize how much we've been doing that until we take an honest look at these resentments and see the part that we played.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Now in the fifth column you see the major character defects talked about in the Big Book:
 
Where had I been selfish (`A2`), self-seeking (`A2`), frightened (`A3`), inconsiderate (`A2`)

All other character defects stem from these. In the fifth column I asked myself this question. "Which of the above character defects caused me to do what I did?" Or caused me to want to hold on to the old resentment even though I may have done nothing to cause it. Now going back to Barbara again, if I hadn't have been so selfish, I wouldn't have been out there doing those things to hurt my wife and children. If I hadn't have been so dishonest I wouldn't have been sneaking around behind her back lying to her all the time. If I hadn't been so self-seeking and frightened and saying to myself, "Man you're getting close to 40 years old if you're ever going to do some of that you better go do it before it's too late." Fear drives us to do things like that. If I hadn't been so inconsiderate of my wife and children I wouldn't have been taking the chance of hurting them in the first place. I begin to see in the fifth column, the type of character I had become, through my years of living a life run on self-will and when I saw it I didn't like it. It made me sick. You see I always fancied myself as a reasonably good person, until I saw how I had become so selfish and so dishonest and so inconsiderate of other people that I was continually doing things to hurt others, and they retaliated and I resented for it. I begin to see that if I don't change those things in the fifth column, if I stay selfish, dishonest, self-seeking and inconsiderate, then I'm going to go on doing the same old things I've always done, drunk or sober. I'm going right on hurting people, and they're going to retaliate, and I'm giong to resent, and eventually it's going to block me off from God and I'm going to get drunk over it. But just think, if I could become a little less selfish, oh I don't have to get perfect, I never will, but if I could become a little less selfish, if I could become a little less dishonest, if I could become less frightened and self-seeking, if I could become a little more considerate of other perople and their needs and their wants, then maybe I wouldn't have to do some of that kind of stuff. Maybe I wouldn't hurt people and maybe they wouldn't retaliate, and I wuoldn't have to resent. And just maybe I wouldn't have to get drunk over it. You see what we're really doing here this is the resentment part of it. But out in the fifth column I now see the exact nature of the wrongs. That I'm going to talk to another human being about when I take Step Five. The resentment is the wrong. That's what blocks me off from God, but what's the exact nature of it, that means what's the truth of it? What's at the core of it what's the inherent characteristic of it? That's what we'll talk about in Step Five. When a guy comes to me and he's committed adultery 44 times I don't care about that. All I want to know is what is within him that caused him to do it in the first place. If he's stolen 364 times I don't care about that what I want to know is what's within him that caused him to do that. That's what we'll talk about in Step Five. In that fifth column I now see the and I'm going to become willing to turn loose of in Step Six. Out there in the fifth column I see the shortcomings now I'm going to ask God to take away in Step Seven. And in my case all the names from column one came off of this sheet to be added to the sheet later to be used for steps 8 and 9. Because you see when I get to Step 8 it says I've got the list, I made it when I took Step Four. In my case every one of those, in your case probably some of them, in my case all of them. Now what I've really done if I have done this the way the Big Book says is I have prepared myself with all the information I need for Steps 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 resentment-wise. Not only have I gathered all the information I need for 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. Well I've had a positive result here. Resentments have disappeared and they've been replaced with love, patience, tolerance, compassion and goodwill. Did we do anything to be afraid of? Did we make a list of dirty, filthy, nasty items? No. Did we do anything that was too complicated? No. I've never seen anything like this inventory according to the Big Book. Now I hear some of you saying and I hear awful good, I've got good hearing. 
</i>

<i>**Joe**: Charlie hears good.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: And I hear some of you saying, well, Charlie that's probably right on those that we did something to them, but how about those that did it to us, and we didn't have anything to do with that. How about those that hurt us as kids growing up. How about those that hurt us in our marriages that we didn't do anything to cause it. Aren't we justified in having that kind of resentment. Well I guess we are if we want to get drunk over it. But you see a justified resentment blocks you off from God just like an unjustified resentment does. When you've got a justified resentment churning around in your head then whoever or whatever you're resenting is controlling your thinking. If they're controlling your thinking, then they're controlling decisions, they're controlling your life for you. And you've given them power to actually kill you because you have given them power to cause you to get drunk again. Not if you've got one of those resentments, and I don't care what it is I don't care whether it's physical abuse, mental abuse, sexual abuse, or whatever. And I keep hearing a n all the time sexual abuse thing usually centers on young women but let me tell you something men know about that too. I don't know how many fifth steps I've taken with men and nearly every one of us somewhere in our background we've had that kind of stuff too it's not just women it's men. If you've got one of those kind of resentments and you don't want to get rid of it knowing full well it might get you drunk, then we better get it on this sheet of paper and take a look at it and see what we're doing with it and we're probably using it for rationalization and justification to rationalize not doing things we ought to go do or just as importantly to rationalize and justify doing things that we shouldn't be doing in the first place. Oh the greatest excuse in the world is if they hadn't have done that to me and I wouldn't hvae to be the way I am today they call that victimization. Now I don't really think we got any place for that in A.A. we're all adults it's time for us to realize that whatever's happened to us in the past does not have to control what we do today. You know the only reason for that is to justify, rationalize, etc. The woman in the book she used her resentment againts her mother to justify her lack of education. Bull. She could have gotten an education if she wanted it bad enough. She used it t ojustify her marital failure. Bull. Mama didn't have anything to do with their marital failure. She even used it to justify her alcoholism. Mama had nothing to do with her alcoholism. She became an alcoholic because she drank whiskey then she drank enough of it she became alcoholic and I think it's time for us to realize we are responsible what we think and how we feel we are responsible for what we do today mother and daddy and other people are no longer responsible for that. Maybe they were and we're little kids but we're not little kids any longer. It really doesn't make any sense to let somebody hurt me 5, 10, 15, 20 years ago and let them hurt me every day for the rest of my life if I'm resenting them they've got me and they're gonna kill me I need to put them on this sheet put down their name what did they do to me, what part of self is affected, what did I do if anything to set in motion, in this case nothing, but then let's look in the fourth column. Are we so dishonest with ourselves we refuse to see the truth. If you've got a resentment in your head, today it's not true, and we'll say that again. If you've got a resentment in your head today, it's not true. No. It was based on truth and it's partially true, but if you've played it over and over and over you've distored it and it's no longer true. Can we honestly look at it and see the truth behind it. Let's look at the fifth column and see if maybe we are so afraid or frightened of facing life without it we refuse to turn it loose because you know after all if we turn it loose and we've got to take responsibliity for our own behavior to help a lot easier to blame it on others now we suffer to feel afraid of facing life without it we won't turn it loose are we so inconsiderate of another human being and we fail to recognize that people that do those things to us they're not necessarily bad people they're sick people. They didn't necessarily do it to us they would have done it to anybody in that position. If we could even begin to consider that maybe we can start a forgiving process. Maybe we could straighten up a relationship with another human being and before it's too late after they're dead it's too late. I'll guarantee you it is maybe we can do it while we're all still alive if we will do those things I think we can get rid of that resentment too when we really see the truth behind it and what we're diong with it if we can't get rid of it that way then we can use the ultimate tool by golly we can pray for them, and if we pray for one of those people resentment doesn't mean that we approve of what they did that doesn't mean we're going to take them by hand and walk hand in hand with them for the rest of our lives, what it means is we're tired of letting them control us dominate us and rule us every day for the rest of our life we can get rid of those kind of resentments too and if we don't want to do that then chances are we're using it for some reason and we need to look at it very, very carefully. Joe?
</i>

<i>**Joe**: Takes two people to make a prison. The prisoner and the jailer. You have to let them out and turn them loose. All those people who I hated. I had to turn them loose. Charlie said, "I don't want to be a victim anymore." Alcoholics Anonymous may be the only association left on the face of the Earth that is more allow us to be victims. There's victims going on all out there everybody wants to be a victim of something. But we in A.A. won't let each other do that because we have a way out. We can pray for them. They need the prayers and we need the practice. 
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: You know I see in many A.A. meetings where we've gone into this group therapy stuff. And we sit around the table and we discuss what those people did to us. And we try to figure out why they did it. We'll never understand why they did it. The thing is they did it. Then we start trying to discuss and figure out why it made us the way we are. We'll never understand that. The fact is that's the way we are. The real question is what are we going to do about it? Are we going to continue letting them kill us? Or are we going to get rid of that Jazz. That's what A.A. is about. It's not to sit around and talk about problems. It's about how do you sit around and talk about how do you solve the problems. And resentment is the number one problem for every alcoholic. And if we can get rid of them, then we're peaceful, happy and free. Until we do, we'll never be free of it. We went through a process yesterday afternoon the first part of the inventory process. There we learned how to look at our resentments to take an honest truthful, moral inventory. And as we listed those resentments, we began to see the truth about them, really. The first thing we saw in column one was how many resentments we really did have, and how much that blocked us off from the sunlight of the Spirit. The second things we saw in column two was it's not the people or institutions we resent, it's what they've done to us that we actually resent. The third thing we found out in column 3 it's really not even what they've done to us it's how we choose to react to a threat to one of our basic instincts of life, which is going to determine whether we are going to be resentful or not. So just in filling out those three columns learned some very valuable information. We were also able to see in the Big Book that resentments was an absolute waste of time. And whenever they're churning around in our heads we're pretty well paralyzed from doing anything worthwhile. And we found that if we honestly look at them, most of us have spent literally thousands and thousands of hours in resentments, and as we look back at that time in our lives, we found they really never did do us any good. They never really straightened out a relationship with another human being, never made us feel better, only made us feel worse, never made us any money for sure, and as far as we can tell, it's an absolute waste of time. We also said that's not the worst thing about resentments. The worst thing about a resentment is that it effectively blocks us off from God, Blocked off from God, we don't feel good, we begin to become insane, we begin to think about taking a drink, we end up drunk all over again. And when we truthfully and honestly looked at those resentments, we could really begin to see how other people have controlled and dominated us throughout our entire lifetime through those resentments. We always thought that we had it under control, that we determined what we said and what we did, but we suddently realized that we really have done nothing but react to others through our resentment toward them. That looked so stupid to us that about 95% of those resentments automatically disappeared. The other 5% that was so deeply embedded we found through prayer that we could remove them also. So we could be resentment free if we follow the procedures outlined in the Big Book. The real revealing thing is the amazing thing is that after we became resentment-free God wouldn't allow another hole in our head, it had to be replaced with something else, the only thing that could replace it is the opposite of resentment. And where we used to feel resentment we now feel serenity (`E707`), a little peace of mind (`E707`), a little happiness (`E709`), compassion (`E408`), goodwill (`E408`), love (`E201`). Those are all God's thinking, rather than our individual thinking. And we found that that came to us automatically. Those things that have always been a part of us, we just never could use them before. Now the resentments are gone then God's thinking automatically begins to replace the resentment, and we're much less chance of getting drunk now than when we started the process. We went back to the resentment sheet, and we looked at it from an entirely different angle now.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: We begin to look at it to see what had we done to set that thing in motion or what did we do we've never looked at that before and in our 4th column we found that in almost all cases whatever the resentment was we ourselves did something to set it in motion and we hurt other people they retailated we resented we played the resentment over and over and over distorted the picture finally transfered all blame to other people. A good practicing alcoholic has to be able to do that we just couldn't live if we didn't have that ability so we really did in the fourth column really did begin to look at the truth of the resentment to see the part that we had played and in most cases we ourselves set the ball rolling we looked in the fifth column to see the exact nature of that resentment the resentment was the wrong but what was at the actual core of it or at the center of it and in the fifth column we found the type of personality that we had developed through our years of living on self-will and living as a practicing alcoholic. And we found this about every time we had heard anybody in the past it was either through selfishness or through dishonesty or because we were self-seeking frightened or through inconsideration of other people and we begin to see in the fifth column that if we don't change those things we're going to keep right on doing the same things in sobriety that we used to do when drinking we're going to continue to hurt people they're going to retaliate we'll resent and eventually get drunk over it and we begin to see in the fifth column the things that we will need to change in our personality if we want to live with peace of mind, serenity and happiness in the future. We summed it up by saying we were in the process of doing the resentment part of Step 4 in the fifth column we now had all the information we needed for Steps 5, 6, 7 and in the names in the first column those that we had harmed they come off of there to be added to the list to be used for 8 and 9 at a later date so we really ended up in this simple little inventory with all the information we needed for 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 resentment-wise. A very positive thing took place resentments disappeared and they were replaced with love, patience, tolerance, compassion, and goodwill so there was nothing to be afraid of there was nothing too complicated there was not a list of dirty filthy nasty items just a simple inventory now we don't want to give you the impression that you can always be 100% free of resentments you know God never gave us anything bad it depends on what we do with things as as to whether they become bad or not the resentment used right can be used for a worthwhile purpose if somebody does something to me that threatens my self-esteem if it would cause me to look at me and see some things that I need to change and I go ahead and make those changes then that resentment can be used for a worthwhile purpose for instance if we're living in the neighborhood all the old houses are run down mine's no worse than anybody else's they all need painting they all got broken window screens and panes and I sit on my front porch every evening after work and I rock and I rock. I'm very complacent about that situation. One day I look up and some idiot has moved in accross the street he's out there painting and fixing his window screens and window panes makes my house look bad I resent the hell out of him for doing that I say who the hell is he miving in here and screwing up this whole neighborhood. Now if I use that resentment right it'll cause me to look at my house and become a little bit ashamed of it the next thing you know I paint my house fix my window screens and window panes my next-door neighbor resents me for doing so next thnig you know he fixes his house up and his neighbor resents him and after a while God's got the whole neighborhood had cleaned up like it should have been in the first place that's the proper use of a resentment but we alcoholics won't use it that way we'll sit on the front porch and we'll rock and we'll rock and we'll resent and we'll resent. Thirty days later we'll go over there at midnight and burn his damn house down. We'll show him so it really depends on what we do with resentments that determines where they're going to be for bad or for good and if we use one rightly it's going to disappear anyhow. The ones that kill us are those that we just leave in our head and it fester and fester and we get sicker and sicker until eventually it creates a real problem for us, Joe?
</i>

<i>**Joe**: This morning we're going talk about fears for a bit and we're going to I don't know we're not going to psychoanalyze ourselves in any manner we're simply going to do like the book suggested yesterday we're going to find the facts and we're going to face the facts and eventually through this process we're going to accept the facts as they really are truthfully and it says also that when the spiritual malady is overcome we straighten out mentally and physically the spiritual malady not only is my relationship with God but my relationship with me and my mental attitudes and my relationship with other people and so that's just another form of spiritual malady that I had. Dr. Jung said we're going to have to look at our ideas emotions and attitudes and that's what we're going through this inventory process we're looking at how it is the emotions and attitudes and see where they came from and if we will we'll go back now from page 18 and I'm going to read this little paragraph that tells my whole story in one little paragraph 
</i>

<blockquote>
"An illness of this sortand we have come to believe it an illnessinvolves those about us in a way no other human sickness can. If a person has cancer all are sorry for him and no one is angry or hurt. But not so with the alcoholic illness, for with it there goes annihilation of all the things worth while in life. It engulfs all whose lives touch the sufferers. It brings misunderstanding, fierce resentment, financial insecurity, disgusted friends and employers, warped lives of blameless children, sad wives and parentsanyone can increase the list."
</blockquote>

<i>**Joe**: In other words it's a family illness it affects everybody in the family to some extent and if you live with one of us very long you'll be affected by it in some manner for sure and as I look back in my life to see where these ideas, emotions and attitudes were to become the guiding force of my life started way, way back 
</i>

<!-- * END OF 4TH STEP PART 5 (S4_P5 "Part 4")
  -- BEGIN OF 4TH STEP PART 6 (S4_P6 "List of Fears")
  -->
<hr/>

### Fear hides everywhere (PLBB)

<i>**Joe**: So now let's go back to page 67 and again we're not trying to psychoanalyze ourselves I just expanded the facts and I accepted the facts as I looked at the facts and I could see where I had come from he said
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: Notice that the word "fear" is bracketed alongside the difficulties with Mr. Brown, Mrs. Jones, the employer, and the wife. 

<i>**Joe**: Six times along that column
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: This short word somehow touches about every aspect of our lives. It was an evil and corroding thread; the fabric of our existence was shot through with it. It set in motion trains of circumstances which brought us misfortune we felt we didn't deserve. 

<i>**Joe**: You do the crime you do the time.
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: But did not we, ourselves, set the ball rolling? 

<i>**Joe**: I did that myself to me because I didn't know any better 
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: Sometimes we think fear ought to be classed with stealing. It seems to cause more trouble.

**Bill (read by Joe)**: We reviewed our fears thoroughly. We put them on paper, even though we had no resentment in connection with them. We asked ourselves why we had them. Wasn't it because self-reliance failed us? Self-reliance was good as far as it went, but it didn't go far enough. Some of us once had great self-confidence, but it didn't fully solve the fear problem, or any other. When it made us cocky, it was worse. 

<i>**Joe**: So what we're going to do this morning is basically about the same thing that we did with resentments we have a little list here and it's a review of our fears and we're simply going to look at our fears where they come from the ideas, emotions and attitudes behind them and what we're fearful of and we're going to write them down in these columns just like we did with resentments and it won't take very long to do this the first column says, "Who or what did I fear?" I list people institutions or principles whom I fear and again in column one I simply write down the people institutions and principles I feared leaving a little space from top to bottom one column at a time and we list those.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: And we tend to say well, we don't have much fear we're tough, we're macho. We're not talking about physical fear anyhow, we're talking about all these fears that run through the mind from time to time and I think if we carefully look at them we'll find that we all have fears connected certainly with our marriages we have fears connected with our children we have fears connected with our jobs we have fears connected with the I.R.S. we have fears connected with the police department we have fears connected with the federal government we have fears connected with the church we could just go on and on and name literally thousands of fears that people have. Now I'm not going to attepmt to phychoanalyze myself. I'm not going to say you know that these fears are things that come from things way back in my early childhood, like when my mom set me on the potty sideways when I was two years old or something but some fear we're supposed to have anyhow it's just like resentments, fear can be used for a worthwhile purpose if they're used right maybe what we're looking at are these fears in our head that just continually kind of control us and rule us and dominate us we made a decision to let God direct our thinking and if we have that many fears then God can't the fears do. I found out the same thing here with these fears that I did with resentments I didn't think I had very many fears instead I started putting them on a piece of paper you can only see one at a time in your head but as I begin to fill out sheet after sheet after sheet I began to realize how much fear already does controle me, rule me, and dominate me, so I did the same thing that I did with resentments started top to bottom listed each fear leaving a little space between each one of them and it's amazing when we see how much fear we really do have we'll never see it until we put it on a sheet of paper, Joe?
</i>

<i>**Joe**: See, for many years I didn't think I had any fears at all. I thought it was a very brave energy that I had and after I filled out this first column I could see that the fears was throughout my whole attitude that outlook on life it permeated every part of my life I was fearful of everything and everyone and I did not know that. So I go the sex column, second column.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Oh, he's got it on his mind this morning.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: I can hardly wait.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: I believe he must have gotten over his headache.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: That brain damage is all I can think about. So I simply go to the second column and I write down beside each of these people or principles or institutions whom which I am fearful what am I afraid of in conjunction with those people. Am I afraid that they're going to do something to me. Am I perhaps going to go to jail for some of the things that I did. Am I going to lose something of value. am I going to lose face. will it result in divorce. will it destroy a personal relationship my life might loose my job those kind of questions I asked myself beside each of those people and institutions and principles as I listed in Step 4.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Once again as we fill out that second column and we begin to look at these fears we're going to find that nearly all of them are going to revolve around about one or two or three things anyhow nearly every fear I've ever had revolves around the fact that I'm not going to get something that I really want or I'm going to lose something I've already got or I've done something to another human being and I shouldn't have done and I'm worried to death about what they're going to do whenever they catch me. Nearly all of them will center somewhere around those things, so we simply just put down the cause of the fear, you know and again I'm not going to say well, I'm afraid of the dark because the mother set me on the potty sideways some fear I'm supposed to have. You betcha I'm a little afraid of the dark. Why? Well I don't have headlights and I can't see at night, and that keeps me from getting hurt, it brings caution. I'm a little bit afraid of heights. Why? Well, I don't have wings and I can't fly, keeps me from getting hurt. But if those kinds of fears should keep me from going outside after dark, if they should keep me from riding in an elevator or an airplane then I better look at them very closely, they're beginning to really, really rule me and dominate me. Most of my fears though center around just basically two or three things

- I'm afraid I'm going to lose what I got
- I'm not going to get what I want, or
- I've done something I shouldn't have and I'm afraid of what they're going to do when they catch me.

Very simple process. Column Three.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: Column Three. And what part of self was affected and again that's why I did that information on the basic instincts of life and the working knowledge of some of those words and ideas to be able to do the third column. If you don't have a God in your life and you're living without God you don't need other people and your living on your own will then there's only one thing you can do and that's to try to satisfy your basic instincts of life and that's what I was doing I was operating on my own so what part of myself was affected, was it my self-esteem (social instinct), was it my security (security instinct), my ambitions (social instinct), personal sex relations (sexual instinct), which had been interfered with. Those are the things that happened and I look down at the third column and beside each name again in each instance I write down one of those basic instincts of life the part of me that was affected by these things
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: You know, I can't experience fear unless there's a threat to one of the basic instincts of life. And I found out as I filled out the third column just like I did with resentments I found out where fear comes from you know I didn't know where resentments came from I didn't know where anger came from I didn't know where fear comes from. Today I realize it comes from a threat to one of these basic instincts of life and just like with a resentment if my basic instincts are at the level that God intends for them to be if my relationship with God is right then you can do about anything you want to to me and I'm not going to experience fear because of it but I'll guarantee you if my instincts are not under control my relationship with God is not right then about anything you do or say to me is going to create fear. Absolutely amazing what we learn by about ourselves just by filling out these simple little columns.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Now, let's go to the fourth column.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: Go to the fourth column and we try to put out all of these things that happened so far and we write down what did I do. what did I do to set the ball rolling? did I do the crime to do the time? Yes I did. was it when my wife was gonna divorce me and I was fearful of it what did I go what were some of the things that I did well I was uncaring about her, I didn't care about her didn't consider her in any manner in any way and therefore I was afraid and I didn't know that. See I really didn't know that I was afraid of those things.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: It told us way back in step 3 that we invariably find that we've made decisions based on self which later placed us in a position to be hurt and we've made decisions trying to satisfy our basic instincts of life and running on self-will those basic instincts become insatiable things we never get enough to satisfy them and we're continually doing things that end up hurting and harming other people and then we got to be scared to death what they're going to do whenever they catch us and even if they dno't catch us the guilt and the remorse eats us up here just like with resentments so we begin to look at the part we played and we find that we did the same thing with fears that we did with resentments as we played them over and over and over in our head we actually distorted the picture and the fears that we have in our head today are not true. Oh they started on truth but they are no longer true well that's one of the definitions of one of those wrongs fear is incorrect believing. And if we carefully look at each one of these fears we're going to find that they're absolutely wrong they started with truth we've distorted the picture and once again we've used them to transfer blame to others so we don't ever have to look at ourselves same identical thing with resentments.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Now, let's look at the fifth column.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: Fifth column says I simply looked down we'll end in these instances was I selfish in those interests? Yes I was. I was very selfish because I was so fearful I was selfish I was afraid I was going to lose things that I already had or I was afraid I wasn't gonna get some things that I wanted was I dishonest? Yes, I was dishonest I took things from other people that didn't belong to me and I was very dishonest it seemed to me like to be successful in any manner was okay with me so I was an extremely dishonest person and I certainly didn't know that particularly and then I was self-seeking and frightened and inconsiderate of other people for sure because I wanted what I wanted when I wanted it and I didn't give a damn how I got it was the way I looked at my life and if you got in my way you shouldn't have so I was very selfish self-seeking frightened inconsiderate individual and I did not know that.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: You know it's absolutely a life living on hell whenever you'er scared to death you're not going to get something you really do want it and then through dishonesty you go ahead and get it and then you're going to be scared to death what they're going to do whenever they catch you, and even if they don't catch you the guilt and the remorse will each you up and our lives really do beceom an absolute living in trying to satisfy these basic instincts of life and we just really drive ourselves absolutely dingy until we get an opportunity to truthfully look at these things now out there in that fifth column once again we see the exact nature of the wrong the fears are what's wrong they're wrong because we find out most of them are incorrect they're what block us off from God, but what's the actual truth behind them well if we wasn't so selfish if we wasn't so dishonest if we were not so self-seeking frightened and inconsiderate we wouldn't have to experience near as much fear as we do but I'll guarantee you if I stay selfish self-seeking and frightened and inconsiderate the same old things are going to drive me I'm going to do the same old things I've always done fear guilt remorse is going to eat me up sooner or later it blocks me off from God, and it causes me drunk. so once again what we're doing in this little inventory sheet is we are doing Step Four  this is the feat part of it out in this fifth column we see the exact nature of the wrong for Step Five, the defects for Step Six the shortcommings we're going to ask God to take away in Step Seven. And then once again many of the names over here in Column 1 will be people and institutions we've harmed and we're scared to death what they're going to do whenever they catch us. So those names will come off of Column One and they'll be added to the sheet to be used later on for Steps Eight and Nine. We got some off the resentment sheet we got some off of the fear sheet  also and one thing that absolutely amazed me is when I really looked at this truthfully as I began to see a lot of the names same names appearing on the fear sheet that I had on the resentment sheet I had never tied that together in my head before. Barbara was on both sheets, I resented her and I certainly feared her and I'm still a little bit afraid of that lady today. If she ever finds out everything that I was doing about 30 years ago she probably gonna file for divorce again I don't know I resented the I.R.S. and I feared the I.R.S. they were also on both sheets I never really had tied that together in my head Now if you think resentments look stupid in your head wait until you get these things down on paper about fears now fears look awful good in your head, but when you get them down on a sheet of paper about they really do look double dumb when you see the truth about them resentments look stupid fears look even worse from there and they look so dumn that about 95% of them are going to disappear anyhow when you see the truth about them once again there's going to be 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 that's been embedded in our minds so deeply that we're probably going to have to have a little help to get rid of those. Now we come to the second prayer in the Big Book on Step Four rearding fears.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: You know when I prayed for those people that I resented my ideas and emotions and attitude toward them changed they didn't change but I did now prior to this idea about these fears my whole attitude and outlook upon life was involved in these fears I had these fears in every area of my life and I didn't know it of course I hadn't had a God in my life either but I've took Step Three and I've got God in my life and now I'm on a different basis and the book says 
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: Perhaps there is a better way--we think so. For we are now on a different basis; the basis of trusting and relying upon God. We trust infinite God rather than our finite selves. We are in the world to play the role He assigns. Just to the extent that we do as we think He would have us, and humbly rely on Him, does He enable us to match calamity with serenity.

**Bill (read by Joe)**: We never apologize to anyone for depending upon our Creator. We can laugh at those who think spirituality the way of weakness. Paradoxically, it is the way of strength. The verdict of the ages is that faith means courage. All men of faith have courage. They trust their God. We never apologize for God. Instead we let Him demonstrate, through us, what He can do. We ask Him to remove our fear and direct our attention to what He would have us be. At once, we commence to outgrow fear.

<i>**Joe**: And as I look back at that my sponsor told me those early days he says the 2 most importants thing about prayer one of them is to start and the other is to continue and as I look back over my life I can see that every time I prayed I change just a minute amount just hardly noticable 
the next time I prayed it was just a little bit more and 
the next time I prayed it was just a little bit more and
as time goes by I could see a real reliance upon God today in my life it wasn't that way in the beginning but when I started trusting and relying upon God rather than myself those fears began to come away from me they weren't as intense as they had and they began to get in the area where God intended for them to be and at once I commenced to outgrow these fears 
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: You know we always hear about the promises on page 83 and 84 we never hear about the promises that are spread throughout the entire book and I think one of the greatest promises to be found anywhere in the book is what Joe just read we asked him to remove our fear and direct our attention to what he would have us be at once we commenced to outgrow that fear now we can take these deep-seated fears just like deep-seated resentments through prayer on a daily basis asking God to take this particular fear away from me direct my attention to what he would have me be instead of that and at one I commenced to outgrow fear. and over a period of days as he directs my attention to what he would have me be and I try to be that as I ask him to take that fear away some morning I wake up and that fear is gone it really, really does work and I think the reason that it really works is when we're asking God to take it away and direct our attention to what he would have us be then that's one of the greatest expressions of courage and faith that we human beings can have. Courage faith and fear will not exist on the same plane. The feat will be replaced by the courage to do the opposite of that fear and as we begin to change it'll be replaced by faith that God really can do these things and slowly we can remove those fear too. Just think this file cabinet up here in my head that was filled with fears has now been emptied out that damaged and unsaleable goods called fear is gone at least to the level that God intends for it to be. Once again God is not going to allow another hole in my head the fear if they disappear they've got to be replaced with the opposite and the opposite will be faith and courage the opposite of the fear itself. I found out I didn't have to go to any other fellowships read any other books to get faith and courage if God dwells within me that's always been a part of my makeup I just never could use it before. In my chase for money power prestige and sex and my desire to fulfill the basic instincts of life and not the worries about it wouldn't get what I want and I'd lose what I got or they're going to catch me at it faith and courage had to be repressed and I had to operate on that fear level but now that the fear is gone faith and courage automatically comes to the surface another positive happening. Two-thirds of my store now has some peace of mind, serenity and happiness in them and I'm in much less chance of drinking now than I was before I started the inventory process. You see we don't have to wait until Step 12 to get something good out of this every step brings a positive result there's negative about anything in our program period. Now also just like with resentment knowing that fears block you off from God that they might get you drunk if you got a fear that you don't want to turn loose of you better look at it very, very closely because we can also use fear to rationalize and justify  not doing something we really would like to do or just as importantly we can use it to justify continuing to do things that we know we shouldn't be doing and if we've got one of those and we don't want to get rid of it we better look at it very, very closely. Let me give you an example of how you can use fear to rationalize and justify. How many of you are here this morning and please be truthful with me how many of you would really like to go back to school and finish your education could I see your hands oh my God at least half of you. Now let me ask you another question. How many of you really do intend to do that. Oh about half of those hands went up this time. I wonder why, nothing in the world but fear. Fear that we won't measure up. Fear of failure. Fear of hard work actually keeps us from doing things that we really would like to do. Now if we can ask God to take that away and direct our attention to what he would have us be instead then everyone of you that wants to go back to school will end up doing it but until that fear is gone it's going to drive most of us away and keep us away we use it to rationalize justify just like we did with resentments so if we got one of those let's look at that closely too. All my life I love to work with my hands all my life I wanted to build a set of kitchen cabinets never would do it because I knew there'd be a lot of mistakes people would laugh and I would be embarrassed now after I worked the program for quite some time one time I got the courage to build a set of kitchen cabinets now they don't look very good there's a lot of mistakes and people laugh at it but I really don't give a damn and it don't bother me anymore you see. So we can overcome these things with God's help. It's amazing what we can do with these things 

<!-- * END OF 4TH STEP PART 6 (S4_P6 "List of Fears")
  -- BEGIN OF 4TH STEP PART 7 (S4_P7 "Sex List")
  -->
<hr/>

<i>**Charlie**: Bottom of page 68 Now about sex. We're getting ready now to look at the store room back here that's filled with guilt and remorse and it seems as though we human beings hurt each other in the sexual area probably faster and easier than we do in any other way and I think there's a reason for that you know the other animals here on earth they have a sexual urge just like we do so that they can and will reproduce themselves but the difference between their sex life and ours is simply that they don't have this thing called self-will. Most of the other animals here on Earth they don't really have any choice in their sex life. When it comes time for them to reproduce themselves God usually signifies that by some physical change in the female of the spiecies the male senses that change prepares himself the two join together and it's kind of like "Wham, bam, thank you, ma'am". And when it's over with they normally go their separate ways usually they do now they didn't think about having sex before they had it, and they didn't think about sex while they were having it, they couldn't decide when they were going to do it God made that decision for them. They usually can't decide who they're going to do it with. They can't decide whether they're going to do it with one or more partners they can't decide how many times they're going to do it and they can't even decide what position they're going to do it in so therefore you see very few sexual problems amongst the other animals here on Earth. I've never seen a cow on a psychiatrist's couch yet talking about sexual dysfunction they just don't have those kinds of problems we human beings are a little bit different you see God gives us this thing called self-will and we can make choices about our sex lives we can have sex every day of the year we wish to we can decide who we want to have sex with we can decide if we want to do it with one or more partners 
we can decide how many times we're going to do it provided we're physically capable of doing so we can even decide what position we're going to do it in they tell me there's something like 64 different positions a human being can have sex in I have no idea what they are, I've only found three in my lifetime and two of those damn near killed me I'm not sure I'm going back to them. So what we're going to look at for just a few minutes this morning is not just about how we do sex, but how we think about sex. Because how we think about it determines how we do it and that determines whether we're going to hurt other people or not and that determines whether we're going to be eated up with fear, guilt, and remorse associated with our sex lives so we're going to look for just a few minutes at how we think about sex. He said

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: <span class="text-muted">Now about sex.</span>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: Many of needed an overhauling there. But above all, we tried to be sensible on this question. Its so easy to get way off the track. Here we find human opinions running to extremesabsurd extremes, perhaps. One set of voices cry that sex is a lust of our lower nature, a base necessity of procreation. 

<i>**Charlie**: I've heard them all my life. They're the ones that say sex is a dirty thing you ought to do it in one position with one person only reason to do it is to reproduce yourself and if you enjoy it it's a sinful thing I've heard it as far back as I can remember they are to the extremes on one side.
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: Then we have the voices who cry for sex and more sex; who bewail the institution of marriage; who think that most of the troubles of the race are traceable to sex causes. They think we do not have enough of it, or that it isnt the right kind. They see its significance everywhere. 

<i>**Charlie**: You can hear them today, they're the ones who say you ought to be able to have sex anytime you want to anywhere you want to with anybody you want to as many times as you want to you ought to be able to enjoy it every time and if you don't then there must be something wrong with you. Well maybe they call that the sexual revolution. The main thing I see wrong with it is that it happened 25 years too late for me to participate in it I know that. 
</i>

**Bill (read by Charlie)**: One school would allow man no flavor for his fare and the other would have us all on a straight pepper diet. We want to stay out of this controversy. We do not want to be the arbiter of anyones sex conduct. We all have sex problems. Wed hardly be human if we didnt. What can we do about them?

<i>**Charlie**: Well I read that last statement with great relief. Because I knew this book was getting ready to condemn me for what I had been in the past and it was getting ready to tell me what I was going to have to do in the future and I'd already made up my mind that I wasn't going to pay any attention to it at all and I was relieved to find out that we're not going to be the arbiter of anyone's sex conduct we simply are not going to get into that question. Now this book is meant to be helpful to anybody anywhere and we start trying to tell people how they're going to have to conduct their sex lives, we start condemning them for what they've done in the past then surely surely we're going to alienate people besides that what is sexually acceptable in one part of the world may not be acceptable in another part of the world, so we're simply are not going to get into that question what we are going to see is a simple little way to review our own past sex conduct see what we've been doing with it see if perhaps we've been using it for the wrong purposes in some cases look at those people we've hurt by it then try to shape a sex life of the future where we can still engage in it and enjoy it yet at the same time not hurt other people and if we don't do something about it and we continue to hurt other people and feel the fear, guilt, and remorse sooner or later it'll block us off from God and we end up getting drunk over it very simple process, Joe?
</i>

<i>**Joe**: I'm not going to be the arbiter of anyone's sex conduct and I needed an overhauling in that area when I arrived in Alcoholics Anonymous and again we're going to look at the ideas and emotions and attitudes behind these sexual conduct that we had and I look back in my life and when I was about 12 or 13 years old I got to thinking about this a lot I mean a lot it almost gave me brain damage from thinking about it so I went to my mom and I said mom of my dad was in the nut house, I couldn't talk to him, so I went to my mom and I said I've been thinking about this sex thing and she said "Oh my God Benny Joe" scared her to death that's my name Benny Joe, "Oh my God Benny Joe" that's not a good thing to be thinking about, in fact that's a dirty filthy rotten thing to be thinking about she said and you oughta save it for the one you love think about that and she said the only time you're supposed to have sex is when you want to have children well let's see she had five children she had sex five times I figured well no wonder my dad was in the nut house but somehow I just didn't believe what she was telling me and we had sex education when I went to school but they called it recess and also in West Tulsa, OK there was a place called Jenkins Cafe and every day and every evning in front of the Jenkins Cafe there was a gathering of very wise intelligent experience men and women of about 15 or 16 years old and they were more than glad to share with you all they knew about sex and some of those guys told me that they were having sex with 2 or 3 different partners at night they said sometimes they were having sex with as many as 10 times a night they said and you know the fallacy of all of that is that I tried to live up to that because that's what I thought it I never could but I tried and I was sober about 2 or 3 years in Alcoholics Anonymous before I figured out they were lying to me at least I hope they were lying. So certainly I needed an overhauling there. When I got here I had the spiritual knowledge of a 7 or 8 year old boy I had the coping skills of an 8 or 9 year old boy and I had the sexual knowledge of a 12 or 13 year old boy. Do you think I needed an overhauling in all of these areas? How many of you got your sex information pretty much the way I did? Someone I need to sit down and look at this didn't you know I remember the very first time I ever had sex I was very selfish and self-centered and dishonest and self-seeking and I was also alone.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: That's why he's wearing glasses today too. Every time we say that 2 or 3 of you guys whip your glasses off and put them in your pocket. Okay, let's look at the next paragraph now very carefully we're going to see here the same set of instructions that we used to look at sex that we had for had for resentments the only difference is that it's worded a little differently which is Bill's way of doing things
</i>


**Bill (read by Charlie)**: We reviewed our own conduct over the years past. Where had we been selfish, dishonest, or inconsiderate? Whom had we hurt? Did we unjustifiably arouse jealousy, suspicion or bitterness? Where were we at fault, what should we have done instead? We got this all down on paper and looked at it.

<i>**Charlie**: So once again we made up a little sheet to avoid any confusion and it looks just about exactly like the resentment sheet except we call it a review of our own sex conduct and in this little sheet a review of our own sex conduct we have the same 5 columns column 1 who did I hurt? Now I doubt if there's anybody in this room in the sexual area that we don't remember just exactly who that is that seems to be a form of knowledge that we all have there might be some question as to what did we do to hurt people in a sexual area well certainly we've hurt them in many different ways. For example if I'm in a married relationship and I go outside of that relationship and I have sex out there and my wife finds out about it then surely I've created a problem for her if not physically at least emotionally if that sexual escapade creates a trouble between my wife and I there's children in my home then I've hurt my children also by the same sexual escapade. If the lady I had sex with out there becomes common knowledge I've hurt her too if she has a husband and children I've hurt them also You know one sex act could hurt many, many different people. I think sometimes we hurt people in a sexual area by demanding more than our fair share. Maybe our partner isn't too keen about having sex every time we want to rather than consider their needs wants and desires we selfishly demanded that they have sex with us when they really didn't want to surely that creates a problem for them if not physically at least emotionally I think sometimes we hurt people in a sexual area by demanding that they do things with us physically sexually that they really didn't want to do and once again rather than consider their needs and wants we selfishly demand those things surely we create a problem for them if not physically at least emotionally I think sometimes we hurt people in the sexual area just be withholding sex maybe we're not too keen to have sex every time our partner wants to and rather than consider their needs and wants we selfishly withhold when perhaps we should give in a little more often I think we hurt many people in many different ways and we pretty well know what they are. Column one we list their names,  Column 2 what did I do to hurt them, column 3, what part of self was affected, Now you would think if I hurt anybody in the sexual area that it would be caused by the sex instinct, and probably part of the time that's true. Sometimes in order to get the physical the emotional gratification that comes at the moment of successfuly completion of the sex act maybe I'm doing the wrong thing at the wrong time with the wrong person because of the sex instinct but I think if we will carefully review each situation we're going to find that usually the other two instincts are involved just as must as sex and in many cases even more so and sometimes sex really doesn't have a hell of a lot to do with it. Now I'm going to express and opinion and I want to make sure that everybody understand this is my opinion it's not A.A.'s opinion, not Joe's, not anybody else's just mine. Today I am convinced that God gave us the sex urge so that we could reproduce ourselves I'm also convinced he made it a very enjoyable thing so we would do so. I don't think you and I would do the kind of work involved in sex if we didn't get something out of it now if we're going sex for purposes other than reproduction or enjoyment then we might be doing sex for purposes other than what God intended. For instance we boys found at a very early age that you can use sex to build your self-esteem after all the more members of the opposite seex you can attract to yourself the greater man you really are we thought. I don't know what you girls called it but we boys called it John Wayne-ism. Jane Wayne. Some of you girls tell me you use sex for the same purposes. Now if that's what we're using sex for that has nothing to do with reproduction really has nothing to do with enjoyment. That's to fulfill a part of the social instinct and sex really doesn't have a hell of a lot to do with it. Sometimes we use sex to buy a personal relationship maybe we're just lonesome maybe we just want somebody to pay attention to us and we found out a long time ago we can give sex and buy back a personal relationship now that's not to reproduce that's not to enjoy that's also to fulfill a part of the social instinct. Sometimes we use sex to buy material security maybe we're in a sexual situation we really would rather not even be in though we've become so overly dependent upon another human being for our material well-being that we give sex to buy back material well-being has nothing to do with reproduction or enjoyment that's to fulfill the security instinct. Sometimes we use sex to get even with another human being maybe we're in a relationship and our partners have done something they shouldn't have done and it infuriates the hell out of us and we say we'll show them and we'll go out and do exactly the same thing. Fallacy in it is after we've done it we can't afford to tell them we did it but certainly we didn't use sex there to reproduce or to enjoy we used it to get even with another human being sex really doesn't have a hell of a lot to do with that. You know sometimes we use sex to force our will on another human being maybe our partner isn't doing what we think they ought to do we say we'll show them we'll just cut them off at the pass we won't let them have any sex so they come around to our way of thinking. Now we boys aren't too good at that we only last two days at the most. You girls have honed it to perfection you know exactly how to do that now I don't blame you know I would use it too for that has nothing to do with reproduciton or enjoyment that's to force our will on another human being. I was absolutely amazed as I filled out that 3rd column to see what I had actually been using sex for two things happened to me almost automatically as I filled out the third column a lot of my guilt began to disappear. I thought I was just a dirty rotten no-good S.O.B. But I found out that I use sex for purposes other than what God intended not because I'm a bad human being but because I'm a sick human being in those areas and I needed that sex to build the personal relationships and etc. and when I saw that a lot of the guilt began to disappear. Tell you another thing that started happening to me in column 3. I began to get a handle on this sex thing. You see I always thought that I was over-sexed and that caused me to do those things but in column 3 I found out I'm not over-sexed I'm under secure and I used sex to build my security and to build my self-esteem and when I began to see what I was doing with sex it began to look pretty stupid to do those things and a lot of that desire to go do it at the wrong time in the wrong place with the wrong people began to disappear and I started getting a handle on the sex thing right here in the third column I think it's one of the greatest things that we can do for ourselves especially we men. We tend to use sex to build self-esteem and sex doesn't really have anything to do with it. We tend to use it to build our self-esteem and when I saw that's what I was doing with it then the desire to go do it became less and less. Column 4 what feelings did I create in others? Did I unjustifyably arouse jealousy suspicion or bitterness What should I have done instead. In column four not only are we looking to see those things that we did but we also need to be looking at what should we have done instead we're trying to shape a new sex life of the future where we can still engage in it and enjoy it yet at the same time not hurt other people. Column 5 which character defect is involved. Same old deal. If I wasn't so selfish I wouldn't be doing something of those things in a sexual area that hurt other people. If I wasn't so dishonest I wouldn't be sneaking around behind my wife's back lying to her all the time anyhow. If I wasn't so afraid of facing life without that sex to build my self-esteem and my ego and etc. probably wouldn't be doing it in the first place. If I really considered my wife and my children and other human beings ahead of my own needs and wants then I wouldn't be doing those things going to take a chance on hurting other people that I'll guarantee you if I stay selfish dishonest self-seeking frightened and inconsiderate I'm going to keep right on doing the same old things I'm going to keep right on hurting people in the sexual area I'm going to have to be scared to death about what they're going to do if they catch me. The guilt and remorse eats me up sooner or later it blocks me off from God and I end up drunk over it. It's not a question of right or wrong it's a question of what can we do and live with it in peace of mind and happiness and be able to stay sober in the future at the very least we're going to have to do something about some of these things or sooner or later it eats us up. Now once again we're doing Step 4 this is the sex part. In the 5th column we see all the information now we need for Step 5, 6, and 7 quite naturally all the names in column 1 will come off of this sheet and be added to the sheet to be used later on for Steps 8 and 9 again I was amazed to see in many cases the same names appearing on all three sheets Barbara was certainly on all three sheets I even had the I.R.S. on all three sheets I resented them and I feared them and I gave them a pretty good screwing before I got through with them. Now let's see what we do with this information.
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: In this way we tried to shape a sane and sound ideal for our future sex life. We subjected each relation to this testwas it selfish or not? 

<i>**Joe**: Prayers are going to be used 3 different times in next page or so.
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: We asked God to mold our ideals and help us to live up to them. We remembered always that our sex powers were God-given and therefore good, neither to be used lightly or selfishly nor to be despised and loathed.

<i>**Joe**: You see God never gives us anything that was bad.
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: Whatever our ideal turns out to be, we must be willing to grow toward it. We must be willing to make amends where we have done harm, provided that we do not bring about still more harm in so doing. In other words, we treat sex as we would any other problem. In meditation, we ask God what we should do about each specific matter. The right answer will come, if we want it.

**Bill (read by Joe)**: God alone can judge our sex situation. Counsel with persons is often desirable, but we let God be the final judge. We realize that some people are as fanatical about sex as others are loose. We avoid hysterical thinking or advice.

<i>**Charlie**: This is an area that I don't think we need a whole lot of advice in anyhow. I think all of us deep down inside we know what we should be doing and what we shouldn't be doing you know I've never been in a sexual situation yet that was wrong that I didn't know it was wrong before I evevr got into it. Didn't keep me from getting into it, but I never got into one yet that was wrong that I didn't know it was wrong before I ever got into it and if you start running around asking people for sexual advice if you ask six different people you are going to get six different answers and then you'll have to decide which one of those to follow and besides I really can't think of a worse place in the world to get sexual advice than in the fellowship of Alcoholics Anonymous I think that's a hell of a place to look for it I think all we have to do is listen to that little voice inside I think it pertty well knows and I think it'll pretty well tell us what we should and shouldn't do and if we follow it we're probably not going to hurt other people.
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: Suppose we fall short of the chosen ideal and stumble? Does this mean we are going to get drunk? Some people tell us so. But this is only a half-truth. It depends on us and on our motives. If we are sorry for what we have done, and have the honest desire to let God take us to better things, we believe we will be forgiven and will have learned our lesson. If we are not sorry, and our conduct continues to harm others, we are quite sure to drink. We are not theorizing. These are facts out of our experience.

<i>**Charlie**: I had a young fellow come to me not long ago he's still in his 20s he said Charlie my sponsor told me I couldn't have any sex the first year of sobriety is that right? I said, "No that's not necessarily right" I said "You can have all the sex you want the first year. The second year you can have it with other people." Sometimes it's hard enough to quit drinking without doing some other things too.
</i>

**Bill (read by Joe)**: To sum up about sex: We earnestly pray for the right ideal, for guidance in each questionable situation, for sanity, and for the strength to do the right thing. If sex is very troublesome, we throw ourselves the harder into helping others. We think of their needs and work for them. This takes us out of ourselves.

<i>**Joe**: It quiets the horny condition, oh, sorry, 
</i>

It quiets the imperious urge, when to yield would mean heartache.

<i>**Charlie**: Old Bill used some fancy words didn't he?
</i>

<!-- * END OF 4TH STEP PART 7 (S4_P7 "Sex List")
  -- BEGIN OF 4TH STEP PART 8 (S4_P8 "Harm")
  -->
<hr/>

Okay, now we're going to make one other suggestion before we leave the inventory the book says we have the list when we made amends we made it when we took Step 4, and we've looked at people we hurt on the resentment sheet, we lookad at them on the fear sheet, we looked at them on the sex sheet, but there's other people that we've hurt in other ways too. Perhaps haven't popped up on any of these sheets maybe we stole money from them or maybe somebody we hurt physically many ways we hurt people in any of those names that haven't come up on at least one of these 3 sheets we suggest we take this 4th sheet a review of harms other than sexual and do exactly the same thing with it that we have done with the other sheets. Column 1 who did I hurt? Column 2 what did I do? Column 3 what part of self is affected. Column 4 what feelings did I create in others, what should I have done instead? Column 5 which character defect is involved, and if we do that then we've got every we need here for 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. And when we've done this sheet then we have completed our inventory we've got everything we need now for 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. Now then we're ready to get on with our business. Very simple procedure now let me ask you something did we see anything here to be afraid of did we see anything here that was so complicated that we couldn't do it, did we make a list of dirty filthy nasty items? did we get any positive results from this? Yes. Is there any reason why we shouldn't go ahead and do Step 4? We don't need to procrastinate any longer do we? It's simple enough get with it, and get on with the program.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: A little bit of study and little bit of help from your sponsor and a couple of evenings and you'll have it done.
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: The book says if we've been thourough about our personal inventory we have written down a lot we have listed and analyzed our resentments. Now some people look at the word analyzed as a bad word all this is is another word that means truth we have taken a moral truthful honest analytical inventory to analyze something simply means to get down to the truth of it and he didn't say it but we've listed and analyzed our fears, we've listed and analyzed our sexual harms, we've listed and analyzed harms other than sexual. We've begun to comprehend their futility and their fatality. We have convinced to see their terrible destructiveness now here's some results. We have begun to learn tolerance, patience, and goodwill toward all men even our enemies for we look upon them as sick people my God what a change in personality already this is a real change taking place here in Step 4 we don't have to wait until Step 12 to get something. We have listed the people we have hurt by our conduct and are willing to straighten out the past if we can in this book you read again and again our faith did for us what we could not do for ourselves. We hope you are convinced now that God can remove whatever self-will has blocked you off from him. If you have already made a decision.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: Step 3
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: And an inventory of your grosser handicaps you have made a good beginning. That being so you have swallowed and digested some big chunks of truth about yourself.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: So what are some of the grosser handicaps which we looked at?
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Resentment, fear, guilt and remorse.
</i>

<i>**Joe**: What are some of the basic character defects that we've looked at? in the basic cause?
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Selfish, dishonest, self-seeking, frightened and inconsiderate. We have really looked at those things very carefully haven't we? Now, the book recognises that we'll never be perfect. It says these are our grosser handicaps. 
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: I think one of the great mistakes being made in A.A. today is everybody sits around waiting until they get well--so they can do Step 4 perfect. You can't do that. Let's get rid of these grosser things. We've got another step later on, we're going to use this process for the rest of our life. We'll be inventorying forever and it'll get better and better. 
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: But these are the major things that kill us. We've got them behind us. Now we can get on with our business. You know, I think this is only inventory I need anyhow. As I look back in my lifetime, I can't spot an emotional problem I've ever had that didn't revolve around one of three things: 
</i>

- I was madder than hell at somebody,
- I was scared to death about something, or 
- I've done something I shouldn't have done, and the guilt and remorse were eating me up.

<i>**Charlie**: As I project my mind in the future, I don't see anything that's going to bother me that's won't revolve around one of those same three things:
</i>

- madder than hell, 
- scared to death, or 
- filled with guilt and remorse. 

<i>**Charlie**: I think this is a perfect inventory for people like us. And we will continue to work on it the rest of our lives anyhow. 
</i>

<i>**Charlie**: Now, I don't know whether y'all have noticed or not but nearly all the information in the Big Book on sex is on page 69. I don't know that that has any significance whatsoever that just happens to be where nearly all the sex information is is on page 69. You know we heard a story about a young lady who been in A.A. about 90 days and she went to her sponsor and she said sponsor I've got a problem their sponsor said what is it she said it's this sex thing she said sober I don't know what to do anything I've ever done in the sexual area tried to attract a memeber of the opposite sex or anything else it's always been while drinking and sober I just don't know how to function her sponsor said well go home and get out your Big Book read page 69 it will have any answer to any problems you might have. So the young lady goes home gets her book out and proceeds to read but she got confused on page numbers. Instead of page 69 she read page 96 just for the hell of it why don't you go to 96 and see what she read. 
</i>

> "Do not be discouraged if your prospect does not respond at once. Search out another alcoholic and try again. You are sure to find someone desperate enough to accept with eagerness what you offer. We find it a waste of time to keep chasing a man who cannot or will not work with you. If you leave such a person alone, he may soon become convinced that he cannot recover by himself. To spend too much time on any one situation is to deny some other alcoholic an opportunity to live and be happy. One of our Fellowship failed entirely with his first half dozen prospects. He often says that if he had continued to work on them, he might have deprived many others, who have since recovered, of their chance."
> <br/>-- (A.A., p. 96, para. 1, lines 1-14)

<i>**Charlie**: I think that's one of the most appropriate things I've ever read it just goes on and on and on.
</i>
